[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
So how are you coping with the with the projects?

Have you got your projects and have you been meeting your team members?

How is it going? Good. Any early fights within the teams?

No. Too early for that.

We'll wait until somewhere between, say, mid-summer.

So your first sprint will be, I think, in week six.

So that is going to be your first sprint. And that is when you guys will start presenting something in pairs from each team.

I hope you are looking forward to that as well. So this one is going to be your last lecture, a formal lecture.

Sorry I couldn't be there last time. I hope you got the video and you watched it.

So that video was about reflection and risk mitigation.

So especially the part that involves how to deal with teamwork based risks is important

because that is very practical in the way that you are soon going to face those situations.

So it is very important in agile teams that you keep talking to your team members regularly.

And so it is kind of A22 way thing like On.

On one hand you are. You are trying to be friendly.

On the other side, you are also actually keeping an eye on what they are doing right?

So it is both a friendly as well as a professional approach.

So keep a nice balance between the two. Because that will help you in succeeding with project completion.

Um. Given this as a student project, you.

But still you have your client, your product owner. So that means there needs to be a lot of seriousness and completing the project anyway.

So in this lecture, the last one we are primarily going to talk about assignment three.

So my aim would be that you guys can at least get started with assignment three during these two hours,

so that these three assignments are out of your way as soon as possible, especially this assignment.

Assignment three is very important in getting your project writing started as well.

So you we will be enhancing your early knowledge about project rationale.

And now we will be attaching some evidence with that rationale so that when you go and meet your clients, your product owner,

you can present them with that evidence and you can show them that you know about the thing you have worked

hard on getting used to and getting all that initial knowledge so that they have more confidence in your team.

So has any team already met the product owner?

Or maybe contacted them? So you at least how many communications have you already carried out?

Any team? A few emails.

Within our team we have visible, but I think we have just shoot the first ubuntu product on and to me.

Okay. One. Okay. Okay. So I assume that you guys are still, you know, like warming up with the product owner and still,

you know, trying to set up a meeting time and so that the things can get started.

So this is going to be a very important phase. So in module one and two assignment three is already available.

And I have already got it open here.

So I am going to go and show you what's it all about.

So assignment one we are currently marking your assignment one submissions.

Um a few things that we have. We are already identifying a few problems.

I would I would mention those problems as well so that you can you can maybe fix those problems when you are working on assignment three.

But some of those problems might not be a problem for assignment three, because you are allowed to do that for assignment three.

For example, maybe talk briefly about the solution.

So in your assignment one submission, some of you have mentioned once a one bullet point about the solution as well.

When I specifically mention that there must not be anything at all about the solution.

So that is something you are allowed to do when you would do assignment three.

You do not have to. But still, you may bring in more purpose to your project rationale.

And you know what is purpose, right?

So we already discussed about rationale purpose and justification.

So The purpose. Art can be a part of assignment three, so you can bring it here.

So what are you expected to do or what are the objectives and learning outcomes for assignment three.

Now you would see that N in all these three points.

It is quite clear that we are going to go deeper into exploration of the project rationale.

And that can only be done through some research.

Let me get some hoops. Free hand Drawing?

Yup. So that can only be done via research literature.

So research literature and or digging into research relevant research.

It has not only relevant to research projects only, it is also relevant to development projects.

I am going to talk about this in more detail soon.

So discovering and demonstrating new insights surrounding your topic area and critically studying the research literature.

To reflect and kind of, you know, accumulating more evidence for what you have claim to understand, claim to have understood about the problem.

And then, based on your deep study, you need to come up with certain points or questions that you can take to the client or the product owner.

So, for example, if they have asked you to build a web app, um, that's all the specific problem.

It may happen that after your research, you would come up with a new knowledge that there are many other similar apps available

in the market which are kind of do exactly the same thing as required by the client.

Now, you need to be honest.

You need you can go to them and tell them that these we have come up with this research that, you know, these apps are available in the market.

You might not know be knowing about this.

Do you still want to go ahead with the project, or do you want us to make certain changes to, you know, the already available similar apps?

So something that would give an indication to the product owner that you have, dig deeper into what was provided to you.

The deep research may also bring in some questions, as I mentioned,

that you can go and ask a client that the requirements that you have mentioned here,

when we have done our research, we have come to a conclusion that this requirement might not be that useful or this is not practical or feasible.

So you need to bring those questions out as well.

Based on the evidence. So these are the three things that you are going to get again.

Whether it was assignment one rationale or whether it is assignment three rationale, you have still not met the client.

So we are still doing our research or preparing ourselves before meeting the product owner.

So that is something that you need to take care of. So we are deepening the rationale and the insight.

Now one primary difference between assignment one rationale and or or should I say the rationale.

And this in depth rationale is. that each of your team member, number one thing is that you are going to work on your allocated projects.

So that is why this is going to be your first step towards developing or completing your project.

So your team, each member of the team will be working on your allocated project for this assignment.

Something that you should note. The second thing is the second difference from assignment one is.

Given your project, whatever project description is given to you, when you read the description,

there will be there will be a major theme, and then there will be subthemes in that major theme.

I'll give you some examples as well. So you need to identify a research theme.

And then you need to look at what are the others of themes.

Or maybe there are multiple major themes in your project description.

And then divide those themes or sub themes among team members.

So what we are planning to do here is we are trying to attack the problem description from different angles.

So if there are multiple themes, then different team members should work on different themes,

should explore the project rationale related to those different themes.

So that is why a divide and conquer approach is what we are going to follow here.

Now each team member is still going to work independently, but then after completing their work,

they can collate their work and that is going to benefit the overall work.

Now what you guys are expected to do. Each team member will be expected to find a research paper relevant to the project.

And when I say relevant to the project, it is going to be relevant to one theme of the project.

Now every team member needs to use a different paper, so that means you need to talk to your team members.

What paper have they found must be different from what you have found.

So you need to make sure This serves two purposes.

One purpose is that there will be no duplicate work, and the second purpose is that you will be able to attack the problem from multiple angles.

As I have already mentioned, you can bring in the purpose of the project as well.

That is what is needed to be done or what kind of app is needed to be built.

You may use more than one papers.

If you decide to do that, you would need to work on two papers or 2 or 3 papers and then collate their information and, you know, work accordingly.

It depends upon your wish. If you your wish.

Or maybe it could be your need as well. The need for your theme could be that you just can't do with just one paper.

You need to search for more papers. Now, the research paper that you need to find must be at least five pages long.

If they are double column, or they must be eight pages long minimum eight pages long.

If they are single, column you.

When you will try and find some relevant research articles, you would see that there are even two page articles as well.

Two page, three page. But they are too limited in providing the relevant knowledge.

Oh, and generally they are the they are.

They are generally known as idea have efforts, so we must not include idea papers.

We want more detail, so more detailed research articles are preferred.

How these research papers could belong to conferences or journals or workshops or symposia.

So these are the general values of these research papers.

The page limit that I mentioned is excluding the references of the paper.

Generally the references takes 1 to 2 pages, so we do not want to include it.

And any other non text pages which are substantial.

Now point number three is very important. And this is where you are going to earn marks for the assignment.

There are some example points given to you in relation to your project.

You need to answer these questions. You may pick other questions as well.

But then I'll come to the marking criteria.

I'll tell you that. You need to pick any four minimum four points or four questions and answer them in relation to your project.

For example, why was this paper useful in relation to your project or the selected theme of your project?

What form, it will be valuable that your client would appreciate you understand your understanding and being aware of.

Again, remember that you have yet not met your client, so you are still kind of figuring out what would be valuable to your client or product owner.

Similarly, was there anything you found in the paper that surprised you relevant to the project's topic?

You did not expect that information. Then any new learning and so on.

As I mentioned, you can bring in other questions as well.

Or you may replace one or more of these questions.

It is very important that when you answer these questions, they must be relevant to both the paper you have picked and your project.

It should not be like you are answering something in a very general way without referring to your paper.

Or the project. Again, avoid discussing specifics of the solution, but you may talk about the purpose of the project.

This part here is very important. You are trying to look at the problem from a different lens or a different angle, different perspective.

So once everyone has done their work in your team and when you will meet, will show each other that you know this.

I've worked on this, and then all the team members are going to share their point of views about what they have learned,

and then all that knowledge is going to go into your project or making your project rationale more in-depth.

It must be written as a reflection. You do not need to have any references.

The only reference you will have is your actual paper that you will be asked to submit or attach to your submission.

You may use a personal language, but now this is going to be.

This is going to be more of a literature review kind of a thing.

So what you are, you will be expected to do as I mean.

A more formal approach towards this would be that you would be writing in a third person from a third person perspective.

But if you want to write from your personal angle, you may do that given you use to use professional language.

Now, when you are going to look at those papers as well, you will see that generally they are structured in a specific way.

That is, we start from a summary of the paper, which gives you a quick idea about what is the problem that the paper is solving,

how the papers all that or or the relevant research, all that.

And then how is it reported and what is, um, what is the end result of what research that has been done?

And finally, what can be inferred from that research?

And then you go to an introduction column where the detailed problem is or the the the main topic areas explained introduced.

And then you move to the literature review. Generally most of the research papers are kind of structured in this way from the start.

And when you go to the literature review, then you will find that there is a little story that is kind of connecting the dots from.

or lead is urged to the current research in the area. And then you'll reach the present research and leave the literature review.

And then you can you can say that now the research related to this problem or topic is ending at this point at the moment,

and this is where we start from. So we are now proposing our research questions like this.

We are going to solve our research questions. So these are 1 or 2 research questions.

And then you go on explaining how you then design different solutions for those questions.

Now last year and in the previous years generally there was a nice balance between research your research projects.

Where you had to develop less and research more, and your development projects where research was lesser.

But the development took most of the time. Now, this year, I see that there are.

Most of the projects are about developing certain applications.

And there is I mean, the problems are more common man's perspective.

Rather than from specialised fields. I'll come to that point as well.

So next thing here you can see that collective insight.

So once you have done that,

your team-mates will sit together and they are going to collate all the information and talk about what we have learned and how this is going to help.

N um, help us in showing the product owner that we, we know about what is required and how that prepares us for that first meeting.

Okay. Next thing is about the about using GPT.

That for assignment one, I specifically asked you and demonstrated that how you can use ChatGPT.

You can still do it, but because it is still a reflection.

Um, try to limit the use of ChatGPT as much as possible.

However, there is still a section in your assignment where you would be expected to explain that.

So if you end up using it, you can explain it there. About submission and formatting.

Again, this is a canvas was 800 to 900 words.

When I say a range, that means you should get like 800 words.

And then maybe when you target 800 words, you generally.

May end up somewhat over 800, so that means you are still safe.

That's why I have given you a range. But do not go beyond 900. Right.

And full paragraphs. Here is another difference from assignment one.

Now you are not just expected to write those bullet points, you are expected to write full paragraphs similar to assignment two.

So that means more details, more detail is required.

And don't forget to attach the paper.

So there is going to be a separate section in the assignment quiz, where you will be able to attach your quiz PDF.

Sorry, your paper PDF. Other things about marking rubric.

The content has four marks. Note that this assignment is 7% of the course.

It is going to be marked out of seven marks. Four marks are contained and I have already told you that we would be expecting.

You to answer at least four questions that were given in point number three.

Each question or each Chance her way is one mark. And then the reflection quality.

Which where we are going to see whether there was a high enough level of reflection.

Whether you have demonstrated new insights coming from what research you are attaching.

And must be in relation to the project. Then the agility, reflection and the writing style.

So this is about. The assignment brief.

Now what I'm going to do I'm going to give you an example.

Uh, we are going to pick one example project similar to what I did for assignment one as well.

So the project that I am going to pick is from one of the previous projects,

which is universal Smart home interface, a custom gesture control in augmented reality.

I have got it open here. So here is the description of the project.

Please read the description and I hope you will be able to understand what is required.

Can you read by choosing a recent project? Did you mean the project that you gave earlier for assignment one?

Or is it the project that we are doing? No. You are. So this time you are going to do it for your own project.

And when you when choosing research paper, does it make me regard to how we are doing the project,

as in the research paper on agile and the methods or the project properties for research.

So after going through this example, I think that question will be answered.

So just wait. Right? Because it is going to depend upon the different topic themes that you have in your project description.

So for example this one here is about universal smart home interface.

Where you are expected to build an application that is based on gesture control, that uses augmented reality,

that is meant for smart home interface, that needs to connect different devices and need to control different devices.

So you can note here that that there are different aspects to this problem.

So once you have read this I will then move on. Do you have a general understanding?

Okay. Now let me go through here.

So we are going to talk about this specific project.

From the project description. Of course you need to develop a customisable augmented reality application for intuitive smart home device control.

You need to use gestures. And the focus is on these different things.

There may be more as well. So for assignment three, for example, if you were working on this specific project,

you would need to develop your rationale using this these these steps.

So first you need to break down core research themes from the project description.

Then you need to identify relevant databases for paper search or relevant article search as such.

Then in order to find the most relevant papers, you need to define search keywords and strings,

which is very important as you know from your experience using these tools and then finally selecting,

selecting and summarising relevant research papers. These can be one or more.

As I have already mentioned. And then you would draft your rationale for this assignment.

Now for this example, when I looked into the description, these are the five themes that I could figure out.

There could be more. Number one, augmented reality interfaces for smart home control.

So when you have this kind of a problem, you.

Are working on developing interfaces that are based on augmented reality.

Then the gesture control or sorry gesture based interaction in augmented reality.

So inside augmented reality or as an application of augmented reality.

One thing would be combining gestures to augmented reality in the quality aspects like usability and accessibility in smart home UIs.

So that means when you dig into the UI development,

you will see that there are many quality aspects such as usability and accessibility, which are key to UI interfaces.

And then the gesture recognition technologies. So there would be many such technologies.

And finally integrating everything together. So multi-device integration and universal interfaces.

So everything has to work together. So what what are what is the current research around integrating these things together?

Is there a phone somewhere under the table? Now here are the research databases that you can use.

Of course, the most common one would be Google Scholar.

Essentially, using Google Scholar would be enough because it is going to give you research papers from all the

others are not using each one of these is going to give you more papers or more relevant papers.

On to search keywords and strings.

Now it is very important that the search keywords n strings that you are going to give us prompts to these databases.

You design them very carefully. Because.

You are already aware that if I miss one word or, you know, miss l one word,

it can give me some irrelevant stuff which is not that irrelevant and it can misguide me towards the wrong direction.

So be very careful when you are putting these prompts in.

So for augmented reality interfaces. For example, you can put a string like the this or gesture based interaction.

In HCI you can put a string like this and so on.

You can think about these strings depending upon your project descriptions.

And then as a result you may get different papers from different sources.

These can be different conferences, journals or other data, smaller databases as well.

And depending upon who publishes them. So you will get those publishers.

Now after you have got those papers, for example, treat these as one pay per per point here.

So assuming that these are the five papers that were found.

Which you thought were, um, you know, the, the top relevant which were of the top relevance for each theme that you picked.

You read that paper, you try to relate it to your project theme and your project, and you came up with.

Some inferences, some additional knowledge. For example, modern recognition methods like media Pipe and CNN and or reliability.

Ah, you have got some evidence about why should we use these?

Recognition methods.

And you have an evidence, a literary evidence, to show to the client that we think that we are going to use these recognition methods.

And this is why we we back back this decision because there is existing research.

So here is the evidence. So all those decisions that you are going to make during your team meetings while while developing that project rationale.

All those decisions must be backed by some evidence. And that is the aim of assignment three.

Okay. So when you meet your client, you are presenting them with your plans.

Each point that you Present. Must have a backing.

Evidence. Okay.

Now I'm going to. Okay.

So the next thing that I want to quickly talk about is, is your actual current list of projects.

So let's go through these projects quickly. And don't point me to your project, because I do not deliberately want to talk about one specific project.

So I am going to quickly give you an idea about how you can approach.

These descriptions for assignment three. I am of course not going to go deep.

But generally when you look at this now this is a web or mobile application project development project.

Which is meant to boost student community engagement and streamline access to support resources and gamify the student journey.

So if you look at this first sentence here, you should be able to identify at least three themes.

For example, you are looking at boosting student community engagement.

And you you want to build a web or mobile application for that.

So that means it would be useful if you search,

maybe you can do a simple Google search as well for the existing mobile application that boosts student community engagement.

And then are relevant in in Google Scholar.

You can also so you can use that same string in both simple Google and Google Scholar.

And then look for the existing apps and existing research around that area.

So you will find that there will be you will find research around student community engagement.

You will find some research papers around that where people would have worked on.

How did we, you know, enhance student student community engagement by doing this or that.

Similarly, you can see that there's a gamify gamification area involved here.

So that means. Number one, can you find some.

Apps that enhance student engagement using games.

Or gamification. Some kind of gamification. And then what is the relevant research.

So there you will find research where people have actually developed a system to enhance student community engagement using gamification.

And then they have analysed and you know, they presented some data and analysed that stuff and made inferences from their research.

So that is something that will be useful. Similarly, when I look at the other other projects.

I note that most of them are app based. However, some of them are more specialised.

For example, this one here. Neurodiverse students and employees.

So we are looking at some cognitive related cognition related stuff.

So for these kind of areas it is it is easier to find relevant research.

And there will be lesser number of apps available.

So that means you are more likely to find, you know, highly relevant resources from Google Scholar and you know, other databases.

Then you might have found for your other other project descriptions, which are, you know, more general in nature, for example.

Or student community engagement. There will be more apps, more number of apps that are related, and there might be less amount of research.

But you know, I, I cannot say that this will guarantee.

So you need to look up. Now.

Deep net discovery network. Now this is a resource group.

So this kind of. Projects What they are asking for here is.

They are looking to enhance their existing website. So again what specific thing they want to work on.

They are looking to work on what specific enhancement they are looking to do,

and what technologies are expected to be more useful than some of the others.

And what relevant research is available. And this is again if for example.

They are looking to migrate the backend database from MongoDB to MySQL to provide more structured and maintainable data management solution.

So this is a very good source of this is a very nice seed for for searching for relevant research.

Is this is this understanding presented by the product owner correct or not, it might be outdated.

So you need to look up, do your research and then maybe you you might be you might find,

find evidence that there is a third database, a relational database that is even better than MySQL for this kind of an application.

Right. But you need to find that evidence.

Similarly others here again this is a more specialised a kind of kind of project which involves speech based depression screening.

And it is meant to be AI powered. This sounds very interesting project.

So again, I mean different areas, different themes can be picked and you can work on them.

One point that I want to raise here is About the size of your teams because there are eight people in each team,

so you might not be able to find eight themes.

So in that case, if you find three themes, then you can distribute those three themes among your team members,

where maybe 2 or 3 members will get one theme, but they must ensure that they work on different papers.

Right. So I think this is pretty much all what I wanted to share about assignment three.

Do you have any questions? Comments? Feel free to discuss.

So what we can do now is let's spend around 20 minutes on actually doing this stuff.

So you know your projects, you know the project descriptions.

Why don't you spend some time on applying. And so identify some themes and try applying these steps.

So what I am going to do is I'm going to show you the steps. So try to do this so that after the lecture you have at least started with this.

So break down your core themes. If you have your team members here, it is good.

Otherwise you can work alone. Thank you.

Yeah. I mean. So who is working on which project?

Or. Mine.

Or is. Okay. Eight.

Eight. Eight. This one.

Yeah. Yeah, it does it. It doesn't say anything else.

Anything at all? Yeah. Voila.

Okay. So that means do anything.

So this is about increasing joblessness, right?

Yes, we have chosen this one, but eventually we got it right.

Yes, yes. And it tells you how in, in our society, the jobs are conflicting.

You know, if there is a human resource.

Who's doing this work? And on the other hand, someone is developing a machine to replace them.

How conflicting are jobs in the society are?

We are making that particular web app or a web application so that it's like a power.

What is the power that it is being saved and they can use it for the next patient.

Something like that. Yeah. Yeah, I mean it it will.

It is meant to help the robot. Yeah.

It is an interesting one. Who else. What about you guys?

Are you on the same page? Number ten. Number ten. And not as the last one.

11. Last one. Last one.

Number 14. Okay.

Yeah. There are. I think there are 50% of the projects are related to health and medical areas.

Right. Uh, and what about you?

1313. Why are they called love building apps?

Okay, so that's a question. I didn't see a real world difference.

Yeah. Yeah. So this is an example of what the client is.

You need to be very careful about what they say, but we then, you know, you should be able to interpret them correctly.

About the CO2 emissions. I was reading somewhere. There was a recent research scientist went to Antarctica and they dug up the ice.

And went down to meet Earth. And then.

So there are layers, right? The layers of ice.

So by looking at the layers, different layers of ice, they can measure the amount of carbon dioxide in in, in previous years or previous decades.

And on the basis of that when they rotate the CO2 emissions.

So it is. It went like this. And. So in recent years it is like going like this.

Okay. Right.

So you can keep working on this.

Um, did you guys out. So make sure that you, you at least take away some themes and then discuss with your team-mates, uh,

also help them identify different themes, because that is going to be your starting point for this assignment.

So the last thing that I would request you to do so on module canvas modules, there is a feedback form because this is a large lecture.

So this is about your feedback form about um, the first three weeks of teaching and learning.

So if you can spend I think it would not take more than five minutes.

So please complete it. I've already added you guys to this Google form.

So there are some simple questions. I think just five of them.

Sounds like a drilling sound. Maybe some work is going on.

So if you go to modules. So under module modules one and two.

You'll see. Here is. Yep.

Thank you. Okay.

Thanks. So I leave you with these teamwork codes.

I hope they will inspire you in working well within your teams and demonstrating a healthy teamwork.

And I wish you all the best for your project as well. I will be around.

If you have any questions, you can email me or you can maybe make a post.

By the way, there is only one at post at the moment. I think Mega made it and then there is nothing else.

So if you want to ask any questions, you can surely use it.

Um, I will be next joining you from week six when I will be alongside Risa will be witnessing your presentations.

So until then, keep working hard and I hope you have a good progress in the coming weeks.

Okay, I really enjoyed these three weeks. Uh, unfortunately I couldn't come in the earlier lecture this week, but, um, that was over.

All three weeks were really joyful. Thank you for your interest and for your regularity.

Thank you. So what are we going to do from next week?

All the lectures? Yeah. So start working on your projects because this is primarily a project based course.

Right. So the first three weeks were just meant to introduce you to agile.

And, you know, so that you can get started with within your teams.

Once you have been allocated your project and your teams, there's no point waiting.

And you should, you know, get on with working on the development of the project.

It is very important that you work hard in the first few sprints.

Of course, the next one week I think is allocated for sprint planning or something, and then you are expected To then week I will.

I think you spend one and then you need to present your spend one during week six.

I think this is what the plan is. So that means you have a busy time ahead because a well started is half done as they say.

So it started and these two weeks will help you when thinking nothing else except your project, at least as far as this course is concerned.

But complete your assignment. Really good thing is that assignment three is also going to contribute towards your project.

So you are going to like um. You are going to earn twice or score twice for the same thing.

They We don't have the Abra lecture now. Yes, of course you can.

For example, this is a very nice space for conducting your team meetings so you can come the lecture space.

Both the lectures and the lab spaces are available to you all the time.

So until we. Well. Then they will be imposed on them.

So there will be no other like theoretical course content.

As such, you will be expected to work on the project from here on.

So it is like three weeks of this content, the base content and then how many nine weeks of development.

And note that your mid sim break is going to be very important. So if you can work more during the mid-term break it will help you as well.

Of course. No, not not nine weeks or eight weeks because your last presentation is due week 11.

So keep that in mind as well. Any other questions or comments?

Concerns. Okay.

All the best. Have a nice day and I'll see you in week six.

Thank you. You can keep working. I'll leave.

Right. Because the space is booked for you until 12.

So if you want to carry on, for example, filling the feedback form or working on assignment three, you may do that.

