[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Good afternoon everybody. Oh, that's super loud. Let's turn that down.

All right. Good afternoon, everyone.

Welcome to the final lecture for this week.

Today we're going to be talking about a few financial concepts, economic concepts that really are important.

As you go out and work on some of these systems cases, GDP, government spending,

governments have limited amounts of resources if they need to allocate some resources to projects that you work within.

That may mean they need to take money from somewhere else. For this transport project.

They might need to take some money from health care, from education. They might need to borrow some money.

Increase our debt to cover some of these projects.

So as we talk about systems or systems, concepts like GDP, government spending, these become really important.

And so what we covered yesterday around social cost benefit analysis. Today we're going to talk about other things that those metrics may miss.

Okay. More qualitative wider benefits quick outcomes.

We'll look at GDP how it's measured. Interpret those some more indicators around GDP and how we compare to other countries and other economies.

What are the strengths and limitations of GDP as a measure of a country's performance or a country's success a country's output?

What are alternatives to this? To GDP, to economic development?

Things like wellbeing, things like happiness. How do we consider those things that are harder to measure?

And then we'll look at one wellbeing framework that we sort of soft launch yesterday, the Living Standards framework.

And Juliet will talk a bit more about that. So I'm going to go through GDP some more metrics.

And then this thing we call productivity. What does productivity.

What does it mean. Then Juliette is going to go through some limitations of GDP and introduce the living standards framework

and how we measure things that our social cost benefit analysis might not be able to quantify or monetise.

And then I'll come back, cover a couple of examples of how this has been applied in previous Systems Week projects.

And so today we're mainly looking at things that apply to the economic and financial case generating options,

doing multi-criteria analysis, comparing quantitative and qualitative things.

And how do we make sense of those in our business cases? So GDP.

Who's heard of GDP. Should of all. Yeah yeah we've all heard of GDP gross domestic product.

So really what it is is it's the total value of all the goods or final goods and services produced within a country over a specific period of time.

It measures a country's output total country's output within our borders.

It's the most widely used measure of a country's economic output,

because we can gather all this data compared to other measures, so it's relatively simple to measure.

We can collate those data. Different countries can collate that data and then we can use those to compare.

It provides a simple standardise and internationally comparable measure of activity.

And in New Zealand, stats NZ measures this through various surveys household expenditure surveys,

business expenditure surveys, admin data, government fiscal information.

So, um. Financial information that's held by Treasury using that together to produce those GDP figures.

And so there's three main approaches. We'll mainly look at the most commonly used approach the expenditure method for measuring GDP.

And so we're talking about the total output in an economy. So we measure those at several different points.

The first one is consumption. All the things that you guys spend money on that $5 coffee then you shoes concert tickets,

all of these kinds of things consumption, consumer spending, all the things that you spend, individuals spend money on.

Then we have things like investment, things that businesses buy or assets that businesses buy to become more productive machines, Plant.

Property, plant and equipment. Tractors on the farm again.

What companies or businesses are spending or investing in order to become more productive?

Government spending. So what? The government spends money on hospitals, education, transport, all of the things that governments spend money on.

In lecture ten next week, we're going to look a bit closely at budget government budgets.

We'll introduce it in this lecture today for the 2026 budget came out about almost a month ago

now that lays out the government spending for the next financial year and then net exports.

So what we produce in this country and send overseas things like milk, things like lamb.

Right. All of our exports, we create them here and we send them and sell them overseas.

Those are our exports. And we minus that from what we bring into the country in terms of imports, okay.

In terms of imports, why do we mean us off imports from exports?

We minus off those imports, because those imports are counted in the country that they are produced in.

So it reduces that double counting. So that's not our productivity.

That's another country's productivity. So GDP is measured within the bounds of a country's economy commonly referred to as net exports.

If you heard that term out in the space. Net exports.

So we would minus off things like what we import cars that are manufactured overseas as an example.

And so we add all of those up and that gives us our GDP.

And so New Zealand in 2025 GDP round about 430 billion.

Now 450 billion. So an increase of almost 20 billion over the course of a year.

Compare that to somewhere like the US. Can anyone guess what the US GDP is?

Throw me a number 32. Yeah.

Where did you find that out? Yeah, it's around 30 trillion.

So giving you an idea of the differences between economies like ours.

Of 5 million people versus the US. And there are two other ways that GDP can be measured.

The productivity approach, also known as the output method or output approach.

Which sums all the value added within all of the supply chains within an economy.

And the income approach summing of all the incomes produced by businesses and people.

So rent rates, wages, interests, profits and added those together and they should all be equivalent.

Right. Mass and energy balance. Basically these should all add up to a to the same thing.

So just giving you an idea of when we talk about spending billions of dollars on a transport project that comes out,

or if you're thinking of the size of our economy, our economy is only 400 billion.

So it should give you an idea of the order of magnitude for some of these projects,

some of the benefits that they need to create and therefore what their impacts are on New Zealand's output or economy.

And so it's a real basic measure of a country's success, the total output of a country's population or a country's economy.

So that's GDP. But GDP changes, right.

It's simply the output of an economy. So the US 30 trillion clearly they're way more right.

So are they more successful. We need to bring these back to the same basis.

So if you think back to engineering, think to technical things like wet versus dry basis.

How to compare those things right. We need to put things on the same basis.

So we adjust these figures based on a myriad of things that we're going to have a look at.

One is GDP per capita. So divide GDP by the population.

And that is generally the largest proxy for living standards across the world.

People that earn more, people that have more, they have better lives.

Is the basic analogy. And so where do we stack up?

We stack up 46th globally probably. Maybe not as high as you thought.

Right. We're a reasonably small economy, and we're going to talk about some of the productivity challenges that New Zealand does face.

If we look at what the top sort of few countries. They're quite small, right.

Luxembourg, richest country in the world. Ireland reasonably small.

Switzerland and Singapore also reasonably small. Right.

Why are they so high? It's because they have really productive economies.

They invest. They have industries that are really productive. They create a lot of value.

So for a small population, they create a lot of benefit, a lot of output.

And usually those that are associated with higher standards of living, stronger institutions,

lower taxes potentially in some countries Luxembourg has a reasonably low tax.

Some obviously Scandinavian countries have a little bit higher tax. The main thing is around the the thing around stronger institutions.

So what does that mean? Lower rates of corruption. Little or lower levels of bureaucracy.

It's easy to collaborate within these countries. Easy to collaborate.

Easy to produce outputs. Higher education. People in these countries are highly educated.

What does a highly educated population mean and means that they're more productive.

They go and do things like engineering. They go and do things like create new businesses, create new products.

They create a lot of value. Right. Remember, we know all about value and value propositions from 303 okay.

Whereas in New Zealand we may not be as productive. We may not create such high value products.

What do we do? We produce things like agricultural products, milk, dairy, meat.

Right. Very little in the way of value added to those commodities.

All right. I'm going to talk a little bit about that in a second.

Another measure purchasing power parity.

So adjusting GDP by cost of living by how much things cost.

Right. If you compared New Zealand to Switzerland it might look at first glance,

because Switzerland has such a higher GDP that they're automatically better or substantially better off in Switzerland than us.

Purchasing power parity sort of brings that into alignment. You say, well, in Switzerland things are really expensive.

That dollar that you have will go further in New Zealand than it would in Switzerland.

That dollar would go further, much further in some other Southeast Asian countries, for example.

I was in Vietnam recently. You can buy a plate of food for $1.50.

Right. So that would adjust Vietnam up potentially.

So if we look at purchasing power parity by GDP, China has the largest economy in the world rather than the US.

So another measure another measure there. And if you look when New Zealand stacks up, not the highest.

Not the lowest. Somewhere in the middle. So that's purchasing power parity.

And so that leads us to a big concept that I want to talk about which is productivity.

So this is a quote from Treasury. But productivity is the biggest long run determinant of wages and living standards.

Okay. So we've talked about GDP per capita right.

That's because that talks about productivity.

We also talk about productivity or GDP per hour worked or per person.

And so our capacity to raise our standards of living depends on our ability to raise output per worker.

The amount of goods and services each worker produces and the value that they produce or the value that they add.

And so it measures how efficiently an economy converts inputs to outputs.

So we talk about this as GDP per hour worked. And so what you see is that New Zealand is not the highest in terms of productivity.

It's not because Kiwis are lazy. You guys aren't lazy.

We're all not lazy. But it matters about what we produce, okay.

The things that we produce, the value of the things that we produce.

And so back in the 70s, New Zealand's productivity was on par with the Scandinavian countries.

But one of the problems that happened was that as technology progressed since the 70s,

a lot of those Scandinavian countries invested heavily in those high value industries pharmaceuticals, software, financial, financial institutions.

A lot of those Scandinavian and European countries are hubs for that type of manufacturing in the world.

Meanwhile, New Zealand stayed in these sort of agricultural industries forestry, Dairy meat, right?

Not much productivity added. Not much value added when you sell those goods.

If you think about forestry, right. You cut down the tree, you process the wood and you sell the wood.

Whereas if you think of somewhere like Scandinavia, maybe they chop down that tree,

they turn that tree into a beautiful piece of art, and they sell that art for $1 million or something.

What is an exaggeration, of course, but that's sort of the conundrum we're looking at.

Another thing is that guys up here a bit noisy, please.

Thanks. Another thing around is the sectors that we invest in.

So New Zealand largely. A lot of their investment goes into real estate.

Can anyone tell me what a capital gains tax is? Is a tax on an increase of the value of assets.

Very good. So New Zealand doesn't have that.

One of the only places in the world that doesn't have a capital gains tax.

So what does that mean? It means that prior to 2018, we had heaps of foreign investment heaps.

Everyone was buying houses here because they didn't have to pay tax on the profits for owning their 15th home.

Right. We still don't have it. It's still being discussed. It'll probably be a point in the election this year around a capital gains tax.

What happens when that happens? They come in. They buy up all the houses.

They shoot up the prices of the houses. And you guys can't buy your first house because it's really expensive.

Okay.

Another thing, another problem with real estate is that for real estate, um, the skills or the value is just transferred between sellers and buyers.

If you think about industries like, uh, Are deep tech Start-Ups pharmaceuticals.

They take something, they manufacture it, and then it produces a whole a whole bunch of benefits to society.

But with real estate, all you're doing is that you buy a house for $5 million.

A few years later, you sell that. You're just transferring that wealth from buyers to sellers.

It's a less productive form of transaction.

It also means that some of those industries have this thing called knowledge spill-over, or technology diffusion and transfer.

People that, like yourselves, upskill themselves in software development or engineering.

You could contribute to this industry in pharmaceuticals. You could contribute to the civil industry.

You could contribute to chemical engineering. There's a whole bunch of transferable skills that you guys would have.

There's a lot of spill-over between these high value industries.

That's not potentially the case with things like real estate, with things like farming and agriculture, which are relatively segmented.

And what that means is that because we're lower in productivity, we have less money coming in in the form of taxes, which means we have less money.

The government has less money to invest in other things that can make us more productive.

Right. There's less available to fund our Start-Ups. There's less available to fund the next Rocket Lab or something.

And so there's problems with financing those investments in the medium to long term.

And it ends up in a perpetual cycle.

And that's why low productivity sectors or the sectors that we work on may not be advantageous to the long term outcomes of New Zealand.

And so I won't spend too much time here, but GDP per hour worked as a measure of productivity.

You can see where we stand up here. There's a Productivity Commission, which I believe may have been disbanded, maybe.

Juliet. Correct me if I'm wrong, but they have a lot of this data here.

Okay? A lot of the data of where New Zealand stacks up against both the OECD and against those other countries.

And like I said, we're not at the top. We're sort of below average their.

Revenue per employee. So another measure basically just highlighting that high value firms usually

result in a high revenue per employees as another proxy for high productivity.

And so we're starting to see a little bit more of that. We're starting to see more high value firms come through the chain.

But one thing that happens is that once these companies become large enough, they'll move overseas potentially.

So Rocket Labs not actually based in New Zealand. They're actually based in the US.

So that's another problem. You have this outflow of people of resources from New Zealand's economy because we're far away.

We're expensive to get to. It's hard to get people to come all the way down to the side of the world again, a perpetual cycle of productivity.

And so this highlights just a couple of the challenges that we face.

Um, if you refer to the slides of Further Back, there's a couple of links there, um,

that outline some of the reports that have been done on our productivity challenges.

Again, small market country of 5 million limits the economies of scale limits that competition really hard to scale.

For example, my industry medicinal cannabis, we used to have five large, um, pharmaceutical companies in the space.

Three of those companies have gone under in the last year.

Basically, we only have one of those companies left still going because the market is so small.

Many businesses are small. I saw a stat or something like 87 or 97% of businesses have less than 20 people, right?

So we have a lot of small businesses. What does that mean? Those small businesses don't have much capital to invest in growth.

They're sort of hamstrung by their size. I already mentioned geographic isolation.

I already mentioned property. I've already mentioned the sort of agricultural spaces we've invested in low productivity industries.

And while agriculture is hugely important and all of these sort of industries

like dairy and forestry and primary industries that drive a lot of our GDP.

We need those. But inherently, the nature of those industries means that they are less productive than other high value industries.

And then government debt. So government debt is like our government credit card.

We spend money. What happened here? Someone know a big event that happened in the world?

Yeah. Covid. Yeah. Yeah. We spent a lot of money on Covid.

Blame Juliet. She made us do that. Just kidding. Um, but what does that mean?

If we have high debt as debt increases, the interest that we need to pay on that debt increases.

That's an expenditure of the government.

That means they have less money left over to spend on other things, like investing in other industries, right?

So government debt is not inherently bad. But just understand that when the government takes on debt,

it's a burden on future generations because those interest payments need to be made in the future,

which leaves less money in the kitty to pay for other things.

And so governments need to balance our needs today, right?

We need that new hospital. We need that new bridge, that new tunnel with the fact that we need to pay those back in the future.

And then so just quickly, before we get to Juliet's part.

Government budgets 2026 budget came out. We'll cover this more in lecture ten.

We collect revenue through taxes and other means, and then we spend that money or the government spends that money.

It has a limit. Every dollar spent is a trade off.

If you spend money in hospitals or education then you can't spend it in transport, Right.

So the budget determines how that money is allocated.

And when that expenditure exceeds how much the bringing in in taxes, we borrow money to fund the rest of that expenditure.

And so the 2026 budget spend is 155 billion.

So if you guys come up with your systems project and you're like our solution is going to cost 150 billion, we don't.

That's all of the budget to spend on everything. Everything.

Hospitals again bridges, roads doing our doing everything subsidising universities.

Right. So this should put into perspective where the magnitude of your solutions for your projects should sit.

And that just gives you a little idea around the revenues, the expenditures and what we had to borrow to fund that.

And a little bit of a distribution on where that money is spent, so you can have a look at that in your own time.

Hand it over to Juliet. Thanks, Mark.

I didn't advise on economics in Covid. Just for the avoidance of doubt.

Um, so Mark's given you this whole pile of tools that you're going to use in your assignment,

and I'm just going to cover here some of the tensions that's going to create,

because we are giving you assignments on wicked problems that can't be solved.

And the tools that we've given you can't solve them. So there's there's some tension there.

And that reflects the tension that the Western world in particular has,

trying to reconcile the problems it faces with the tools it's got to deal with them.

So we've just heard about GDP. GDP is the metric that countries compare each other against in terms of performance.

Each year it's the stick with which we beat our governments.

So we complain if our GDP is low because we take that as a reflection of our individual wealth.

And certainly GDP per capita gives you a taste of that.

But as you move beyond thinking about simple traditional economic metrics to solving long term wicked problems,

you should think about the limitations of GDP and also all the tools that you have to address the problems that ultimately attach themselves to GDP,

because they all think about a very narrow short term economic frame.

So GDP lumps together what I've called goods and bads.

So if you look at GDP in New Zealand, you get a major bump in GDP after a disaster.

So I lived in Christchurch for the sequence of earthquakes. Disaster.

Absolutely awful. Everybody's lives were completely upended.

Workplaces, schools, you name it. But the year after GDP look fantastic because we had to spend so much money putting everything back together.

Did the earthquake make us better off? No. Did GDP look good?

Yes. So that's a really simple example of one of its limitations. It certainly doesn't reflect distributional equity.

So it doesn't care how the money is distributed. It's an average figure.

And some of you will care more. And some of you will care less about whether that matters.

Do we want really rich people and incredibly poor people in our country?

To an extent, there's always going to be a distribution.

The ends of that distribution you can disagree on, but we can all agree that GDP will tell you nothing about that whatsoever.

So it's not a good way to make decisions if you are worried about distributional equity.

It measures what was spent and not what we have to show for it.

So you will hear successive governments beat up the previous government for inefficient spending.

So if you spray money everywhere, GDP goes up. GDP doesn't say hold up.

What did you spend that on? You need other measures for that like productivity.

So it's a very crude measure. And you need to when you're using it, look at other measures to give you that spend quality.

And it doesn't capture the stocks of things that relate to well-being.

So as an amusing example, because it's Friday, Mark mentioned shoes.

So if I go out and buy ten pairs of shoes, then I am contributing to GDP.

If I have 50 pairs of shoes in my wardrobe, which I can neither confirm or deny.

That does not show up in GDP. It does relate to my well-being.

I really like shoes. If I give the shoes away, that's probably a good thing to do because I do have too many shoes that doesn't show up in GDP.

If I give them to an up shop, which might help distributional equity, that doesn't help either.

So if my goal is increase GDP, I would just buy an infinite number of shoes.

Dangerous goal for me to have and I try and avoid it.

So let's zoom out a little bit. Let's think about our retiring population.

Let's take a 70 year old that's living on K road. They have nothing, hardly any possessions.

And let's take a 70 year old that's living in one of the fancy apartments above K road.

They have plenty. Um, we can spend money to improve both well-being, and it'll look the same in GDP.

But one will need clothes, shows food, warmth, healthcare and one's probably fine with all those things sitting in their cupboards.

And so we don't pick up anything to do with stocks. Scale that up across the population.

Think, too, about whether we've refurbished our hospitals, our schools. We've mended all the potholes.

All those stocks are not captured in GDP, only what you spent last year.

So it drives all these system behaviours by setting a short term financial goal.

Not a bad thing to do, but you really need to think about it in a measured way when you are tackling long term problems.

And of course, it doesn't consider the inevitable limit to economic growth.

So all these economic metrics assume growth is good, and generally speaking, growth is good.

But you can't keep doing it forever or you will run out of resource.

So this is Kate Raworth who is a professor in Oxford.

And she wrote this book a few years ago, which has subsequently been updated, called Donor Economics.

And what she's trying to do is address some of these issues with current economic metrics, such as GDP.

By thinking about the problem in more than one dimension, and I'll let her speak for herself.

So a few years ago, I tried to draw a picture because I loved drawing pictures.

I tried to draw a picture of the world that we want to live in, and it silly those sounds.

It came out looking like a doughnut American one with a hole in the middle. So imagine a doughnut.

There's the outside, and then there's the inside, and there's that hole in the middle. In the hole in the middle.

That's a space of deprivation, a space of shortfall where people don't have the resources to meet the essentials of life,

like they don't have enough food or education, they don't have access to electricity, enough income.

They don't have decent housing. So it's a space of shortfall. And we want to get people out of that hole in the middle into the doughnut,

but we want to do that for the whole world, making sure that we also don't go beyond the doughnuts out of crust,

because that's a space of ecological overshoot, where humanity puts more pressure on the planet than the planet can take,

and we start causing climate change or massive loss of biodiversity.

We start creating a hole in the ozone layer, or polluting Earth with chemicals that we add to it.

So we need to both get people out of deprivation and poverty,

but also protect Earth and protect these fundamental, life supporting systems that keep us alive.

Those are the two sides of human well-being, the inside and the outside of the donor.

And the 21st century challenge is a unique one. It's to get everybody out of poverty while coming back in at the same time.

That's never been taken on before.

And that's partly why we need to rewrite economics, because it's a completely new way of looking at what human well-being is.

So that's a big, bold goal. And some of those ideas will be useful to you as you think about how clunky the tools that

you've been given are that the world's been given are to solve some of these problems.

So when you are looking at the non-financial aspects of your teams and systems projects, these are some things you might think about.

Um, so I said GDP was an average measure that didn't capture inequity.

Um, locally it's very easy to see what's happening.

So if you start an afternoon stroll down by the waterfront here, these are people's often second homes.

Um, and on the viaduct, it costs tens of thousands of dollars a year to keep your boat here.

Um, you can walk for 2 or 3 minutes to Queen Street, and you will find people living on the street.

Um, you're always going to get some distribution of wealth that is getting a bit extreme for lots of people in New Zealand.

I think even if you think that is fair in a reflection of ability and, um, people deserve what they work for.

Um, you might be concerned about the health consequences of that inequity.

So with inequity in wealth comes inequity in health.

Most people, I think, still in New Zealand, think we should have a universal health system.

The more people slip into poverty, the more social problems they experience, the more pressure there is on the health system, also the justice system.

So when you come up with your solutions to some of these problems and you are thinking about priority of spend,

as Mark said, then health, education, social issues fall on all of us in the current tax system.

The other problem you get with inequity is problems with social cohesion.

So, um, a simple measure of social cohesion.

I live on K road. I can walk down K road. It's a nice, happy, quirky street full of colourful characters.

As more and more people become homeless and as the nights get longer, it gets less and less safe feeling to walk down K road.

And that is a little litmus test locally of whether you are likely to suddenly get a brawl on K road, which you may have seen in the news.

And ultimately, whether you get major protests in New Zealand.

This is from the parliamentary protest against the vaccine mandates.

So lots of research shows that as inequity rises, social cohesion is challenged.

It's harder and harder for leaders to keep the country behind them.

If you've been following the news in Britain, you'll see they've had their seventh prime minister in a few years.

That's unheard of in Britain. They've always had very stable government that is reflecting a challenge to social cohesion.

As GDP drops, you'll see that almost falling out of the top 20 in Marx graph there.

And as GDP drops in equity increases, it's harder and harder for a leader to get the whole country behind them.

It also doesn't tell us about environmental health. So we've talked about plastics.

I introduced the topic marks showing you what happened in the systems projects last year.

Nothing in GDP captures that. So you could really increase GDP by buying lots of single use plastics.

But that wouldn't really do anything for the environment at all.

So how are you going to factor that in? And then there's this really fluffy measure of happiness or well-being.

So some of the poorest countries in the world have some of the most content people.

People do research as to why getting away from that spend spend, spend get GDP.

It may or may not be a factor in that. And of course, all these things are hard to measure If you do want to measure them,

and you may want to measure them depending on the topics for your team and systems work, there are indices of happiness that you can look at.

You'll see in this one, which comes from a few years ago, New Zealand came 12th, which is pretty good really.

So we might not have a very good GDP, but we are a lot cheaper than some of the people with better GDP.

Although I note that there's a high correlation here between the happy people and the high GDP people, I don't know where Ireland is.

I meant to look that up. Anyone recognise this guy?

This is a young Robert Kennedy RFK, who you may have heard about from the Trump administration.

So this is the same dude that's currently in charge of the health system in America and is making America healthy again.

I agree with him on GDP. So it's a good example of very different policy positions that you might have with someone, but shared values.

So RFK in his younger days noted that GDP does not allow for the health of our children, the quality of their education, or the joy of their play.

It measures everything in short, except that which makes life worthwhile.

The counterargument, of course, is that it's easy to worry about these things when you have enough money to buy all the basics,

but he certainly has a point there,

and I think it's interesting that that's the same guy that we see holding some very strident positions on health in America.

If you're interested in Gross National Happiness, there is an index.

You will see these words come up time and time again over the next few slides.

All sorts of different national and international organisations try and capture the essence of non-financial well-being.

So Living Standard which includes a financial element.

But health education, what you do with your time, whether you trust the governance systems, What are your environments like?

Whether people have good mental health, what the community is like and what sort of culture and resilience we have, and you can map those out.

This is 2025. You'll see New Zealand's quite chirpy. Ukraine, understandably, is not very happy in Europe.

And I think the unhappiest country in the world was probably Afghanistan.

And of course, all these measures are going to have a cultural component.

So it's not really an accurate measure, but it gives you another lens to compare countries alongside GDP.

I'm not going to go through them all because you'll see the same thing over and over with different words.

But the OECD Better Life Index might give you some ideas.

Um, here's a couple of national frameworks framed in different ways.

And they're all trying to capture are we ageing well?

Is the education system good? Do people have somewhere to live? Do they have a job?

Is the justice the people care about each other? Can they relax in the environment?

And what about the energy crisis? All these things get folded in somehow to how good people are feeling about the world,

which ultimately feeds into social cohesion and all those other things.

So in New Zealand, we have the Living Standards framework.

This is built on the OECD wellbeing approach and tailored to New Zealand, and it's been going since 2011.

Now you'll see all the information on the Treasury website. Um, that doesn't necessarily mean that it's used in every government decision.

And we'll go into that in lecture ten when we talk about how decisions are made in government, but it is informed by public feedback.

As Mark mentioned earlier in the week, as much research as possible goes into it to give a meaningful measure of non financials.

So you've seen this infographic before. This is the three levels of our Living standard framework.

These are the domains that Mark touched on things like health, engagement, voice, safety.

Do you feel safe in the streets? This subjective well-being of people like chirpy going about their day.

Whether you feel safe in your institutions, that could be your community, your family,

your household, your far now, um, and international connectivity plays into that too.

And then this is the place I suggest you concentrate when you are trying to tackle this in your teams with the four capitals.

So for any problem you might be facing in terms of your assignment,

thinking about the four capitals is a helpful and structured way to enter into the non-financial aspects of cost benefit analysis.

So there's the natural capital, very obvious in a country like New Zealand,

you see debates about the value of natural capital playing out in Parliament with things like the mining and conservation debate.

There's social capital. Um, do I feel safe if there is a brawl on K road?

Will someone come and help me? Um, all those kind of deep things about norms, rules and institutions that keep us safe as we go about our day?

There's human capital. Um, some proposals will improve.

Human capital. Some won't. At the moment, we have a big problem with human capital because of the unemployment problem.

You may have heard news stories last week about the youth unemployment, the graduate unemployment issues.

Of course, that's not going to help our productivity if we invest in people's education.

And then there's no gainful employment. So we need to think about that as we recommend to government.

And then there's the financial and physical capital around us.

So that's a lot of the Metrics that you've covered this week will help inform that one, but you've also got these other three.

How you weight those is a values choice. It will be up to your team how you consider those values as a group.

I don't suggest you spend a lot of time on this one,

unless you are really interested in how Maori worldviews and indigenous worldviews might give you a different lens on some of these problems.

I think it's really valuable, and I think some of the principles are ones that will probably become more important as your careers progress,

because unlike a lot of the Western frameworks, the the Harawira, which captures Maori tikanga and principles, looks at intergenerational prosperity.

And that is the one thing that is missing from a lot of the frameworks that we tend to use in the West and will help us solve the long term Problems.

Um. The reason I don't recommend you use it for your assignments is because it's not as well developed.

You won't find as many exemplars and you won't find instructions on the government websites,

but you might like to keep it in the background to to inform some of your commentary, depending on the problem that you get.

So the Living Standards framework is used in government will do more on that in lecture ten.

It's used by all governments driven by the advice offered by Treasury.

But that's at the policy level. At the political level.

People pay different amounts of attention to it. So in 2019, we were being written up worldwide as having the world's first wellbeing budget.

But in 2025, those wellbeing provisions were stripped from the Public Finance Act.

In many ways, you will find that it's not actually a difference in practice, it's more a difference in rhetoric.

And if you're interested in how Treasury actually does a lot of these things on the ground.

This is Tim Ng. He is from, um, the New Zealand Treasury, or he was.

He's recently left and moved to IRD, and he was one of the people responsible for making sure the Living Standards framework was implemented.

Um, and if you talk to Tim,

he will tell you that the rhetoric that you hear in the Parliament hall is very different from the policy work on the ground.

And those four capitals are always considered. So I'll hand back to Mark.

Oh one more. If you want some tips on how you might go about measuring and monitoring some of the non financials, there's a couple of examples here.

So this one's on child poverty which you often hear about. It's how we measure child poverty.

It's hard but there are measures. And this one will give you some tips on how to monitor environmental health.

Um and there will be equivalent Resources that will be useful for your teams and systems project.

Thanks, Juliette. So finishing off for the day, we're going to have a quick look at some examples of how to apply this right.

So you've seen you've heard a lot of concepts a lot of frameworks today.

How are we going to apply these in our Systems Week projects.

And so multi-criteria analysis is one thing that you can use to compare both quantitative and qualitative impacts.

You'll have to do that for your options assessment. Remember we covered that at the start of the week when we looked at business cases.

How do we assess those options against DFA against our critical success factors.

Similarly, we can use this to compare things in our social CBA and then compare those to the qualitative aspects of the four capitals.

And so a point here that the numbers aren't important, right?

You can come up with whatever scoring for any of your options or for any of the impacts.

You can come up with whatever score. What matters is the justification behind what those numbers mean.

If that option is a 16 for the natural capital, but this one is a 17 for the natural capital, we chose it because it's got 17.

I'll put a big fat zero through your discussion. You need to tell us why.

What are the reasonings behind choosing this one over this one? There are always trade offs, and that's what we're going to look at here.

So if we look at the plastics project and I won't go through all of those.

Feel free in your own time. But there are pros and cons.

There are positive and negative impacts to all four capitals all ways.

Okay. There are trade offs between the different capitals.

You can't just generate new things without considering what the impact is on the other capitals.

So in the past, students have been great at describing what the positive impacts are.

It's a little bit weaker on describing what the net are, what the negative impacts are, or what those trade offs are.

Okay. So if we have a look quickly and a couple, let's say the natural capital,

the good thing about these they're going to reduce plastics going to landfill,

lower those volatile gases or those volatile compounds coming off landfills.

And they'll reduce fossil fuel extraction to produce those.

But the cons are recycling and composting facilities can also have high energy and high water usage.

So that's a negative impact on the natural capital.

So by looking at this and thinking yep we're reducing plastics going into the rivers or reducing plastics going to the landfill.

That's great. Actually you also have a negative impact on that natural capital as well.

So really the point being there is always an impact, both positive and negative, across those four capitals.

Okay, so you can have a look at that in your own time.

A previous different example here, but I like the way that they constructed their multi-criteria analysis here,

actually listing the positive and the negative impacts across those four capitals.

These guys that try to also encompass the out of way order.

Again, up to you guys. You might want to have it in the back pocket to pull it out.

It really does change the lens for how you look at things because rather than the four capitals, it actually has a hierarchy to those capitals.

Why do I spur it in the middle encompassed by Tao, the natural capital, and then the human capital around that?

Anyway, just something to review in your own time, and this one as well.

So outlines across a different. This one was healthcare I believe.

Yes it was around wait. Times a couple years ago. I think you can see again how they laid out before capitals highlighting a point here.

Mobile clinics for decreasing wait times. A cost effective providing early interventions.

But there may be variable demand. Hard to utilise those only that trucks can go in certain places and can only be accessed by certain people.

Okay, so really these two are just for your own.

Review your own revision to see how the context changes may change how you write up these different systems cases.

But you have for the plastics case, you have that full systems report on canvas.

You can have a look at this in your revision and have a look through those full cases.

And to sum up everything that Juliette and I have said GDP, historically a good measure has been used as simple.

Can be done can be comparable and and productivity as a key long term driver of well-being.

But GDP doesn't capture everything. What about environmental costs?

What about social well-being? Governments have limited resources.

Trade offs need to be made. The Living Standards Framework can assess some of those wider benefits that the social CBA cannot capture.

And New Zealand's long term economic challenge is improving productivity through higher value industries and thinking about medium,

short term, long term impacts. You may want to consider those timelines as well.

All right thanks guys. Any questions I'll take those. Otherwise that's it for this week.

We'll catch up with you next week. Have a good weekend guys. GDP per capita divided by Gross National Happiness, then New Zealand.

