[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Hi everyone, and welcome to the second week of semester two.

How is it going? I am told that you have now formed your teams.

So as per his announcement, there's one team which has just two members, and there they might be looking for team members.

So, um, is the team here today?

The two members? Okay.

So there are a couple of deadlines coming up. You already know about them.

Um, you need to build on the projects, and you need to submit your project portfolios or team portfolios.

So that is something that you are expected to do.

The assignment one is also due this Thursday, so you are expected to submit that as well.

Remember that it is our canvas quiz. All you need to do is complete it on canvas.

Any questions from your side? Anything you want to discuss before we start today's proceedings?

Okay. Just give me a second.

Right. So from the last lecture, I hope you now know the difference between wants and needs.

Even when we compare this with the real world.

You know that we have more wants than, uh, the needs.

So, um, this is not only a lesson for your projects while discussing it with the client.

It is also a lesson for your lives that you need to have a clear understanding of what your needs are and whether they match the warrants or not.

Okay. On this note. Start with today's session.

So the way I plan today's session is how many of you have started working on assignment one?

How many of you have already completed it? So I can see that there are eight submissions.

So how many of you have completed? Please raise your hands.

One. Two. Or three.

So what we can do for the first 20 to 30 minutes is I want to give you time during today's session to complete assignment one.

So you can now work on assignment one.

And then we will move on with with today's major stuff.

Okay. If you have any questions around that you may ask or do not do not ask questions like whether this is correct or not.

Right. If you have any doubts you can ask. So look at the assignment one brief and start working on it.

Note that it was about the high level project rationale or what we also know by the name of speed rationales.

You need to come up with a sequence of bullet points, which will go from high level rationales to low level rationales, but must be connected.

They must have a flow. Note that when you submit them, if you want to make multiple submissions, you may do that.

In that case, the latest submission will be the final one.

For those who have already completed the assignment one.

If you have any other questions or. Note that assignment two is also published, so if you want to have a look, although, um,

you would need to go through today's content in order to start working on assignment to.

School related to the topic of assignment or is it um.

If you go to modules. So here is a zip file that contains a list of projects.

These are not this year's projects. So these are like 1 or 2 years back.

So you are expected to pick three out of this list and work on them.

So assignment one wants you to write about the project rationales for the three projects.

You'll see that on the project pages there are only brief descriptions for each project.

So that is your seed for starting work on the rationales.

The previous lecture I went through how it should be done.

So what you can do is maybe look at the previous lectures recording as well, and then take it from there.

Or a better approach would be to put someone else.

You know. Yeah. Okay.

How are you? Going to.

Do this. Sure.

Yeah, sure. I. Think probably everybody in the world.

You. Know.

So so very important here is the description that has been established in the past.

You know, you need to think like this.

Just go home. Right.

And that's the goal of this exercise is going to be So you have to make that work.

So all of this is a single exercise.

But you can discuss with the team. First what do you think. Right. So thank you.

So much for talking with us. Oh, yeah.

Yeah. Well, we have for each of each of the four.

Hundred and 96 point.

One. Just so you. Know, we talked about what is the difference.

So basically we are going from here essentially justification out of the reason for this.

Is the one lowest in the. Middle East.

And we are looking to get here and look. For it.

So we will. Also be working on this problem.

Can you help me? Yes. Sir.

Yes. You can expect us to know how to use.

Any idea how Awesome. Yes.

Yes. Yes.

Yes. So for the projects, um, I wanted to add something to what Reza explained in the first week or the first lecture I.

You have now formed your teams, right? So you have formed your teams, but you are yet to be allocated the actual project.

So it will be very important to discuss with your team what happens if you do not get your the project that you bid upon as well?

As I mentioned that there is a high probability that 50% of the teams won't get what they wanted.

So it is very important.

And sometimes we might have formed the teams by looking at the expertise of of each team member, but that is related to a specific project.

But you might if you do not get that project that then you know there should be a way out.

Everyone must understand that, you know, there might be a technology that one of the team members or two of the team members might,

um, spend time on to learn from scratch.

Uh, which would be an example of cooperation within the team.

So that is something you need to talk within your team. So this is the page which you can visit to look at the textual detail.

So this relates to the previous week. So people who are speakers on.

I assume that you are representing your feelings and you are the only member of your being present, right?

People are worshipping God. Is that correct? I just spoke to one person, so I'm not sure.

Oh, okay. Is there a name for a number or between its two groups?

Anyone from Group ten? Okay, because I always recommend that if you already have a team and if you are sitting in class.

So you should be sitting together, that helps them with economics early on.

Were you planning? To meet them for the New Covenant on Wednesday.

Because you have to wait on the wall. Or the building is on.

This is important. You are supposed to ask us.

Yes. How did it go?

How can we engage? So there are two ways you can use campus messaging.

And then you use the eight discretion. Yeah.

And once you you can communicate to them that you can decide on your own communication tool, for example, to provide comments for me.

So it is very important to do it as soon as possible. And if you haven't talked to him.

The problem is. That you know what I mean.

So if I did it now, I just don't know what is going to be okay.

Five more minutes and then we'll start. You would need to make a submission form.

After completing all three of the three.

Yeah. So this is one form which allows for submissions.

So for this piece of art, for each of the 3 or 4 or.

Five generally a projection. Once completed, don't forget to.

Make sure that it shows you that it has this image.

Okay. Thank you. I hope you are able to at least get started with assignment one, and maybe you can save that work and continue later.

So what I'm now going to do is start talking about today's topic and which is agile and scrum really a very common,

a common set of terms that you keep on hearing in the software engineering world, especially from the last couple of decades.

I recall when I passed out from my engineering. So in 2002, I'm talking about 2002.

Um, these words were very new because agile was formally, um,

written down as a software development characteristic or approach in around 2002 or 2003.

So, um, there was a software engineering book by Roger Pressman.

If you have read that book, and it used to be a textbook in those days,

and in its first chapter, uh, first chapter was about the software development process models.

There were traditional models and iterative or evolutionary models, spiral models and all.

And then at the end of the chapter there would be a little section about agile.

So it mentioned about, you know, there's this um, software development approach.

Uh, one confusion that people generally have about agile and its relation to software development.

I need to be here because this is not working.

So one relation between agile and software development processes, which I feel is actually not a software development model or methodology or process.

Rather, it is an approach. It is a kind of a characteristic that you can apply to a givens of development process to make it agile or not.

The term agile is is simple to understand. Anything that is quick nimble would be agile.

And so how can we apply that concept to a software development process?

Now when we talk about the term process in general, we will say that the term process is applicable to any field,

any Project a sequence of steps for doing something.

You can call it a process. So in the software development arena,

we we have this process and different kinds of process models that would tell you about how to implement a process.

For example waterfall model, spiral model. And there are many others.

So agile is mainly mainly a thinking, a way of approaching a project development rather than a specific methodology.

So the first thing that you need to keep in mind is when you someone asks you whether your.

So you are working on a software project, whether you are following an agile methodology.

So you need to interpret this question asks whether your software development process is following the agile thinking.

Now the thinking is actually communicated in the in the industry by using the agile values and principles.

Where values will guide the generation of principles or the definition of principles.

I remember this as a link here. Agile manifesto.org.

If you click on it. You'll see this.

Um. Quite an old age, and I'm surprised that it is still the same from 2002.

So they haven't updated it, but it still followed.

Maybe they have deliberately, deliberately kept it like that,

but it is the first place where the agile manifest was published, and we keep on referring to the specific age.

So where these are the set of four agile values, we say that maybe our parents have given us some values, maybe our society has given us some values.

Similarly, agile has a set of four values that that the software development processes

that follow agile must follow these values or must incorporate these values.

So the four values are very important to understand, because when you would be working in your teams on the projects,

given these courses on agile and leans of development, you would be expected to follow the agile values.

So in order to do that, each and every team member must know what are these values?

And not theoretically, but practically. For example, agile says that individuals and interactions must be preferred over processes and tools,

which basically means that when you are working in a team, you the team communication is is a high priority Continuous team communication.

Valuing each and every team members capabilities is very important.

No one is leading the team. No one is left behind.

The team has worked together and everyone has an equal say in the team.

And when we look at the other side, the processes and tools, that means that.

Of course, succeeding in life. People say there are two ways.

One way is you have limited resources, but you are a very hard worker and highly motivated.

So maybe then you can achieve that goal. Still achieve that goal.

And the second approach is you have all the resources in the world.

You might not be that motivated. And still you are, you know, so so if you can reach that goal.

Who has a higher chance of doing so? Who is more motivated?

Right. Motivation is very important. Even though it is, you do not have enough resources.

So that is why agile says that focus on individuals and their effective communication,

rather than focusing on spending on improved processes and tools.

The second value is working software over comprehensive documentation.

And this is basically I want to become lean in terms of both.

The software code that I am writing, as well as the documentation that I am attaching to it.

For example, you are you must have heard about Software Requirements specification document,

which says any software development project during the early stages, a software requirement specification document is prepared.

Now, if that specific document document is too detailed or is and most most of our early effort on

building the document and lesser effort on actually starting to work on developing the project,

that is something agile doesn't follow but doesn't encourage.

It says that your documentation minimal and get on working on the actual implementation

as soon as possible so that you can have a working software that is a software.

Which has a successful build. When I say build, that is it.

It has been compiled successfully. It is running successfully at least initial versions so that the other team members.

If you think about your GitHub repositories, for example, if are opposed, frequently updated with a working version,

he or team members are able to clone it and start working on it without worrying about whether that build is working or not.

So that is the idea of the second value that is working.

Software prefer to go after a working version of the software, rather than on spending effort on comprehensive documentation.

The third value is customer collaboration over contract negotiation.

And this brings in the client part and it will be very important for your projects.

Now, Reza mentioned that, um, in the first actually mentioned that some of the product owners might not be available for routine meetings.

So for some of the teams, that could be a problem because.

Uh, this third value of agile has. The third value of agile is that you need to continuously collaborate with the customer.

Now here, product owner is your only representative representative from the client side.

Actually the customer. So he's playing as a customer. He is playing as a client, is playing as a user.

Right. So you need to treat them as your customer.

Now agile says keep the customer engaged with the product.

A project development throughout all the sprints. Um, you might restrict them.

Restrict these meetings to the end of the sprints only.

But I know some of the, some of these, uh,

scrum cycles where they are preferred to keep the customer representative as a part of the team as well sometimes.

But in your case, because, uh, results mentioned that Or all the projects.

The product owners are mostly non-technical. So keeping them with you during the sprints is not going to serve any purpose.

But having them a part of your meetings, which we call sprint reviews, will be useful.

I'll come back to these terms later. So customer collaboration over contract negotiation is about normally this part of the project,

you will have a contract signed between the customer side and development team or the your your business end about what is to be done,

what is what are the requirements and so on. You don't want these set of requirements or this contract to be rigid.

If it is too rigid. Then we are saying that we are not going to, you know, allow any kind of changes to this contract later.

So I suppose during the first spring preview, we show our prototype for the product was on the fly.

And uh, after next week, he doesn't he's not available.

And then the following week he comes. But then we make assumptions while he was not there.

But he doesn't like it, so we have to scrap the idea. Yeah.

So so in those cases, the suggestion would be to, uh, be ahead of the game.

That is, during your first meeting, you need to set up and make sure that, uh, how is the availability of the product owner in the coming weeks?

Because in in the course you are going to have one week sprints.

So it will be important that you ask the product owner right during the first meeting whether you will be available for the next one.

So in case what happens if you are not available, can we go ahead and you know, how much can we go ahead.

Because first meeting is very important. Why?

Because you are going to um, you are going to have a at least a draft of the, of the product backlog, which is the requirements.

So at least you would know what what are the expectations.

So you can talk to the product owner that you know, these are the requirements that we have at least finalised at the start.

So in case you do not, uh, attend the second meeting, should we go ahead with the rest of them or, you know,

these many if you do that and then Product Owner comes back after a couple of weeks, you would at least have, um.

You know, you can say that we did talk about it.

Yeah. So there will be lesser reasons for them to complain.

So be keep ahead of the game. It is very important.

So keep on collaborating with the customer over establishing establishing strict contracts.

So that is something which follows. And then responding to change over following a plan.

Uh, it closely relates to this one as well. Uh, all or are they do relate to each other.

Uh, but these two because we are talking about following a plan.

So don't go after following a strict plan. rather you are allowing the customer to bring in new changes anytime during the development sprints.

So in a way, you are telling the customer that we are ready to do anything for you, right?

So if yours has been settled product backlog, it's okay because we are starting with it.

But we are telling you right from the start that we will be happy to accommodate your changes in strengths.

Of course you you need to be given your project.

There may be some restriction. Right? The project you are working with, for example,

you are using a specific technology to implement a specific feature of the project and then after two sprints,

if the customer comes back and says, my competitor is using something else you might not accept in that range.

I mean, you need to be sceptical, but you can tell them that wherever possible we can bring in those changes.

So these four values, then for the guide who come up with these 12 principles.

So those four values are the base for these 12 principles.

Again they are coming from the same page.

You see that they are published here. Now I hear that in the in the last few years there has been a 13th principle and 14 principle and so on.

But the main ones are here, so you need not bother about the others, but you can.

Of course, if you want to do it, you can go and search for further information about these principles.

So just, uh, give a couple of minutes to read through these and try and relate them to the values.

So these 12 when you will read them, they are like an oath.

Like our highest priority is to satisfy the.

Uh, satisfy the customer thoroughly and continuous delivery of valuable software And so

each member of the team is expected to go through these principles and follow them.

We welcome changing requirements even late in the development. Deliver working software frequently.

From a couple of weeks to a couple of months. Now look at this.

Because this is a limited course. We are not giving you the lower end of this.

Even the lower end of this limit. We are giving you even less.

That is one week for each sprint. So in industry you will have generally have around four weeks of sprint.

But again, it depends upon the scale of the project and the specifics of the project.

People work. The team members work continuously and frequently with high energy, and it is very important that the.

Number two. If we keep on adding new requirements to increase the scope of the project, there's no limit to stopping it.

Yes, yes. And that's why I mentioned that we need to talk to the product owner and make it clear right in this,

are that we will be able to make changes wherever possible.

But then again, it should not be like you start with one project and on another.

No, it should not be that vast. And of course this is never going to happen because more than you, the product owner,

is worried about the completion of the project because they are going to own own the project or the or the end product.

So normally this won't happen.

Abnormally anything can happen. So like do something with for a child.

Usually have two weeks of spring. We can make sure that within the first sprint or then whenever the post release is going to happen,

we can make this much of changes to do and the upcoming sprint or the next week.

Or we can take another. Yes you can. I mean, it all depends upon what are you talking about during those meetings.

And again, these are going to be sprint review meetings.

And you will see the plot owner and you need to you might have some questions about the specifics of the requirements.

At the same time, you might want to talk about how much changes or what kind of changes you can bring up a list.

In most cases, maybe the product owner might introduce this operate on on their own because they might

be worried that they do not have enough clarity about the requirements at this stage,

and they might be them a bit. Then you need to talk and make sure that.

Your team is, like, absolutely clear about what is possible and what is not, and and able to communicate this to the product owner.

So, so many of these things are going to be subjective in that way.

And it depends upon your communication with with the product owner and and your specific project.

So these principles are not not going to be a part of the contract.

This is important. Like, you know, no one is going to know. Product owner is going to say that.

You said you are going to welcome changes to, you know, until the end.

So that is something that is just there to guide your software development process in an agile way.

But it will depend upon how your interaction goes with the product owner and what what are you what are you guys decide?

Note that point number six emphasises on in-person conversations these or at least face to face conversations.

These may be online or N. A working software as the primary measure of progress.

If at one moment during your sprints or development sprints, you do not have a successful build.

That is a build that has been compiled or created by error free compilation and everything is set up for the others other team members to access.

If that is not the case, then then it will be difficult for your team to progress in a good way because you cannot measure

the progress until there is a ready product which you can demonstrate to the product owner,

and you have to demonstrate it to the product owner during the sprint reviews,

and hence the importance of availability of the working software all the time.

So this actually very, very closely relates to the concepts of continuous integration if you have learned about continuous integration.

So if you are working on a repo, your code base and if you make as a team, each member is allocated the development of different features.

And and everyone is completing their their bits and committing them, they need to do them in in smallest possible chunks.

It is very important that you make small changes and commit them, and make sure that the build is not broken.

That has everything is passing the tests so that at the next moment,

if one of your team members wants to clone and pull in all the changes from your shared repo, they should have a successful build to work on.

It is very important. Now, another advantage of this would be that during a given day in a sprint.

If if your team members are making smallish changes and making sure that they are regularly pushing.

That would mean you will have the availability of a working software multiple times each day,

so that the team members can check out your latest working version at different ends,

different times during the that day, and your team is always ready to demonstrate the latest version.

Sometimes when we are working on a large project and we have seen these these cases often, and I teach a similar,

not a similar course or even based web web development course and comms I as well as of end stage three.

So you see that all these friends who grew there, they are three member teams.

What they would do are they would do all the work and then then commit.

So they will keep working like two days, three days or even weeks.

And then they will, you know, push a single set of changes and commit once, and sometimes it breaks the will.

And also it gives us very little evidence of whether they worked regularly or not.

So it is important that you you make your changes frequently.

That is good for the confidence of the rest of your team as well.

So I'm not going to talk about it, but agile is very closely related to the different practices that come along.

Extreme programming. If you have heard the term extreme programming,

so you should urge about the different practices such as pair programming and code reviews and stuff along with continuous integration.

So extreme programming practices help in implementing or making a software development process agile.

Now there is also. It is very important.

To keep an eye on the quality of the code throughout the development.

Sprints and maybe one on 1 or 2 team members can be allocated this role.

Although in agile you say that every everyone is responsible for everything.

But still, if the team agrees, then 1 or 2 members can be given this responsibility of regularly looking at the code and

making sure that they are Following the quality requirements that the teams set up during the.

During maybe during the first meeting. Now,

note that Reza mentioned in lecture one that there's a good chunk of your marks that are going to be allocated towards of air quality or code quality.

So make sure that during your first meeting, you guys talk about a code quality and how to ensure that the code is of good quality.

So regular code reviews is very important. Now during your your sprint retrospective meetings I'll come to that again.

So they are your team meetings. The sprint retrospective where you are going to talk about a sprint that has just been completed.

It is a good time to talk about how can we make little tweaks so that we can improve our overall process.

For example, maybe at the end of a sprint,

there is a complaint about one of the team members that they didn't spend enough time on completing their part.

So you guys should you know what, what to do if this happens, or maybe what to do if one of the team members is unavailable.

For some reason, it is 99% chance that one of the team members will fall ill.

During the development process. During the semester.

And what to do when when this situation occurs.

So in the next lecture, what I'm going to do is I'm going to bring my knowledge from, um,

my research from the last couple of years where we worked on looking at the risks involved in teamwork in software development projects.

So all those risks, there are so many risks that you need to be worried about right from the start.

And so your initial team meetings must talk about them.

And I just gave you one example that um, so another example could be like you guys are working.

Everything is going smoothly. Suddenly one of the team members stops responding to emails and communication.

So what would you do. So this is this is an example of a risk.

And so you need to think about how can we mitigate this risk.

So what would be the possible solutions to solving this problem if the need arises.

Right. So in one of my recent courses, um, the same situation happened from a tutor.

Tutor of the course. So this suddenly vanished. It sent an email.

Um, midnight sent an email that I am no longer engaged with.

With the with the university was as a German. So what to do now?

You need to. So that means I would need to find a replacement right now.

finding replacement may take time. So if you are working as a team and one of the team members is away.

Suddenly you have vanished. So you need to make sure that you have a plan.

A replacement plan. So maybe, for example, if there's an eight member team every.

So you can work in pairs so everyone has one backup at least.

So if you are unavailable, I have to take care and so on.

Results mentioned that if if there are problems in your teams which which you think that you cannot resolve,

then you need to report this to Raisa early rather than late.

Because if you approach them as a in week ten.

Then they won't be able to help. Right.

So do you have any questions? Comments?

So from my experience from coordinating team work related courses and software development related courses or courses,

I have seen that it is very common in teams that few people would be working more than the others.

So there is an imbalance among the team members. I have already pointed this out that you need to make sure that you are contributing

and your contributions have enough evidence as reflected from your report.

For example, you should be making regular commits. Commits are the best evidence.

Sometimes what happens is the students would say that, you know, we had a team and um,

my work was planning, everyone else was coding and I was planning.

So then you do not have any opinions. And so your contributions are not clear and that that means you will lose.

So make sure you do not fall in that trap. So I won't go into the other things here.

You can watch these videos in your free time.

One thing I would like to mention here is about user stories, which are just another name or individual requirements in a software project.

But you can see that there are more, more,

more development team or developer friendly because they are written in a way that tells you what detailed story.

And one line. And mainly we are talking about a requirement that is linked to a specific user of or not.

What is to be done? That is the functionality itself and then why this functionality matters.

So that is strung into one line. So if you for example click on this link here You'll see some details and some examples.

For example here. You can see this example as a project manager.

Now note that when you are building a software project, the end product might require you to cater for multiple types of users.

You have already seen that there are at many users, there are normal users, there are maybe some manager of users and there there are interfaces.

The graphical interfaces will be different. There are functionalities that you need to implement for them are different.

So in those situations for example. So user stories would help you to incorporate those specific kinds of users as well.

So as a project manager, I want to generate a project status report so that I can share.

Progress with stakeholders. So who is the user, what functionality you want to implement and why that functionality is important.

So all these three things would come into one user story.

Now as a part of. Finalising your product backlog that is your set of requirements.

And then further your sprint backlog. That is requirements that you pick for each sprint.

You would have these user stories, or you can say that each requirement can be split into multiple user stories.

And then you are going to keep taking them off or or specific sprints.

So you need to prioritise them and then, you know, move them to specific sprint backlogs.

Hopefully. Now it is up to you.

Like you you might be using Trello or whatever. I mean, it's up to you to write these stories.

The primary thing here is that. The requirements are going to give you acceptance criteria for these users for you.

Acceptance criteria are. Criteria are going to help you in ultimately deciding whether the implementation is,

uh, validating These user stories are not right if they are going to be simple tests.

Acceptance criteria will help you in validating those implementations for a given user story.

For example, if you have a um, have this user story, then you might have an example use that can give you one acceptance criterion,

and then you can relate it to the final implementation.

For example, a project manager, John, is generating a project status report containing this content,

uh, so that they, they want to share the progress with these stakeholders.

Now this becomes very specific. And now you can relate it to the implementation and make sure that that acceptance criterion passes.

So one major advantage of working using acceptance criteria is that acceptance

criteria are very easy to translate into unit tests or integration tests.

So that is a primary advantage of of writing the acceptance criteria right from the start.

Now acceptance criteria takes into stage if you are implementing something called test driven development,

which do start with the acceptance criteria.

So as soon as you look at a functionality, you, you don't go into the details of the functionality.

Rather, you write acceptance criteria for that functionality and then work from there so that you exactly know what what is needed.

For example. In most of our age group or stage one courses, we use a tool named Code Run.

Or programming courses. So we embed like ten test cases for each question into Cortana.

And so if the students implementation passes those ten test cases then they are they can say,

you know, they have a pass that passed or completed that pass.

Now let us assume that we have we have given them those ten tests.

We can see them. So what they will do, they will write the code.

And as soon as all ten tests pass, will see that done.

They won't bother about any other edge cases. Any other boundary cases, they won't bother about them.

So that is what we are talking about in test driven development. So it depends upon what your product owner says.

If they say that, you know, it should be foolproof. I want you to test is test it extensively.

If that is the case, then you need to write more tests.

So this was about the user stories. Do you have any questions or comments.

So my purpose is that while I am talking about these things you keep on relating it to your teams, right?

So for example, most of you do not have your whole team here.

So you can move down as these are things I want to discuss with you, right?

It is all about completing the project stress free.

So the project will be completed stress free only if you communicate very clearly with your team members right from the start.

Okay, so this is about agile. Agile thinking. Not that agile is just a thinking or an approach.

It can be embedded into any, any, uh, normal or old days of development courses.

Now, if we want to have an example of an agile software development process,

then we will talk about something like Scrum or Kanban or others scumbags, and there are so many in these days.

Now we are going to next talk about a scrum, because whatever I have, whatever terms I have mentioned,

they mostly belong to scrum, for example sprint review or Sprint retrospective.

So I'm going to next jump to scrum. So where is it?

Must be under module one and two here.

So now I'm going to ask what is an example of a software development process that is agile.

You can say that. One such example which was which old, which was devised, or which was created using agile values and principles was scrum.

Although in industry we see both views.

There are teams that the that do not have a scrum.

Maybe they prefer some derivation of scrum or any other agile process.

But then there are others who work who are still working with the old school scrum.

So there are so many factors involved in deciding this.

And one major factor is generally that a given team is used to a specific kind of project development process.

So they do not want to change. It is so difficult to change, right?

Very similar to our computer science curriculum or software engineering curriculum that keeps on changing.

Whereas the curriculum for physics, mathematics, chemistry, it, it remains very similar.

So basically the scrum software development process is a lightweight framework that is defined around people and their communication.

As we know that in, in in agile values, we put a lot of emphasis on individuals and interactions.

So that is where scrum focuses. You now know that every team is going to have a Scrum Master who is not a leader of the team, but a facilitator.

They will kind of help people with resources or knowledge, but they are not leading.

We say that in scrum teams everyone is a leader and there is no leader.

And then scrum teams are normally self-organising teams.

For example, if someone wants to sew so that people may be able to switch roles during the sprints,

for example, someone was allocated the work of testing the modules or functionalities,

but then in the next sprint, or maybe during the same sprint, one of the team members Is unavailable, so they are there.

They are happy to reorganise their role. And then the Self-organising stuff.

It is it. It mainly means that at the start of the scrum cycle, people are going to self-organize by communication.

So they are going to self-organize their role. So this is not going to be dictated to them.

Then the term product owner, we have already talked about this.

Well Skip this product backlog is a set of requirements scrum team and then an increment which is the workings of produced After every sprint.

So that means in your presentations, the weekly presentations, starting from week six, you will be expected to present an increment of your sprint.

So it will be the first increment and then the second increment, and so on.

Note that the term working software.

So an increment is always a working software.

But you need to have a working software at all times available, all times during a specific sprint as well for your team.

So if you look at the modules. You'll see that in in the in the module three mod module three,

you have a link to Scrum Primer which is a guide, a textual guide for the scrum knowledge.

So it is it is going to be very useful for your team that you can use it as a reference.

So always keep it with you. If you have trouble understanding something while you are communicating with your team members.

If you hit a problem and are not sure how to relate it to scrum, then go to Scrum Primer and read this this stuff.

Now if you look at this part here in the Scrum Guide, there are these three important aspects.

In addition to values and principles. Being transparent, it is the progress of each team member is visible to everyone else.

This is very important. How can you achieve that?

You need to set up some tool in order to do that.

For example, in Trello you can have a board for each team member.

So there will be allocation boards. And then you can say that, you know, whenever you complete this board put it there.

Or generally we have a definition of done which we talk about where you can place a tick against each

user story and then say that it is done so the progress is clearly visible to each and every member.

So do not make make opaque teams within your team.

Many times what will happen. There are eight member teams, and then there are other three groups who are more closer to each other ends.

And they are like transparent to each other, but they are opaque to the rest of the teams, the rest of the groups.

So do not do this. And I have already mentioned about inspection.

Keep reviewing each other's work. And finally adaptation.

Now. Adaptations. Adaptation is very tricky because when you will do your spring it in there will be.

There can be many problems.

For example, one team member might say, ah, um, I told that I would work in this technology or this part of the project using this technology,

but now I think that I am not comfortable working in this technology.

I would want to either switch to some other technology or maybe some other member and help me out.

Or maybe, you know, they can swap work.

So is your team good enough to adapt to this challenge?

Or maybe the product owner comes up with a new engine in a requirement.

Now, you have already promised that you will do some minor changes,

or whether you are how much adaptive your team is to those new changes, whether they are in technology.

Or simple functionalities that will be very important to decide on early.

Decide upon early on in the development. Now, when I term adaptation to a specific kind of maintenance, which is known as adaptive maintenance.

Now maintaining a code base is of different types.

For example, corrective maintenance I want to correct something because during the sprint review, the product owner told me this.

This doesn't seem correct. Maybe this visible feature is not correct or it is not working correctly.

So you now need to do corrective maintenance.

Or maybe your team has found some issues during your own sprint retrospective and or maybe a daily review,

and you now want to do a corrective maintenance. When you have a defective maintenance.

Now, I have already talked about adaptive maintenance. So you want to adapt with changing environment conditions technology team members.

And how effective maintenance can be a problem.

Perfective maintenance is when there is no trigger for a team member to work on something and this still work.

For example, they think that a UI can be can be made more aesthetic or, you know, um, there can be a better design.

No one has asked them to do it, but they do it because they have time and interest and motivations, or so they go on and update something.

But then when the rest of email is here, they say that, why did you do it?

I mean, this was not part of what we discussed.

So affective maintenance could be a problem as well.

So you need to talk about this at this art that only do what is required.

Do not, you know, show your own creativity beyond what we have talked about.

Now, sometimes the Platonov might tell you to do it.

Please bring in some creativity wherever you can.

Then you have that option. But then you need to make sure that the other team members know that you are doing this.

So here are different terms for scrum. For example developers, there can be different kinds of developers.

You can allocate roles. For example you are a tester, you are an analyst or you know doing something else.

Product owner scrum asked a. And then different scrum events.

You already know what is a sprint. Sprint planning will be a meeting where you'll plan about a specific sprint.

It is different from Sprint Retrospective, where you are particularly talking about the previous sprint.

And then sprint review is every time you have completed a sprint and now you want to demonstrate it to a product owner.

And there is a meeting that involves product owner and daily scrum is 15 minutes team meeting at the start of each day about you know where you are.

Are you facing any problems and so on. Then product backlog, sprint backlog and increment.

And so for every increment there will be a definition of Donne attached, right?

Or whether that increment is complete in relation to these user stories.

The process again, this was shown to you in lecture one as well.

I, I hope you already understand these. Now we start from a product backlog and then sprint planning sprint goals where you short list spring the

user stories that you want to bring into the sprint back a sprint a specific sprint and then work on them.

Uh, this step is also very important in the sprint planning, because this is going to cover the prioritisation of user stories.

Given a product backlog, which user stories are most important for the product owner,

and this is where the input from the product owner is going to be very important.

And then the cycles with daily scrums definition of done on the increment and sprint review followed by a sprint retrospective.

So I'm looking at this and. I am thinking that your, your weekly presentations would come somewhere here because you,

you would review it with your product owner and then you are going to present it to us.

Uh, I'm not sure whether whether razor will be inviting the product owner to those presentations.

And then there are other videos that you can watch.

So now what I want you to do is I have been speaking for about one hour.

Um. Go to modules.

And you will see that there is an agile scrum.

Software development is requires. So try attempting this.

There are 20 questions and they are based on a specific scenario.

So I hope you will you will find it useful.

So there is a specific project given here a little description.

And you need to answer some of the questions there. It is a mobile app for local farmers to track crop health.

And connect with buyers. Given the time, I'll give you ten minutes and then we'll discuss it.

Feel free to discuss with your team members. Some of them are very easy, but others might be tricky.

It is basically there to make sure that you understand the concepts.

Okay, let's discuss them.

So which Agile Manifesto value is best reflected when text prioritises delivering a working app quickly overwriting detailed documentation?

Yep. So it is easy in the in the development team and whites are two daily scrums.

Is this aligned with scrum principles? No, because in daily scrums the team is fighting and they do not want to invite the product owner.

At least they are managing their own staff.

The team decides to release a minimal minimum viable product after just three sprints to get early feedback from farmers.

This aligns with which agile principle.

Yep, deliver working software frequently as constantly engages farmers for feedback and adjust the product backlog accordingly.

The practice represents which Agile Manifesto value.

So this is slightly tricky. So here we are talking about Sara is engaging with the hammers.

So it is going from, from the team, from from the product owner to the users.

And we generally not talk about, you know, we have we have been talking about our own development team and things.

So basically what we are doing here, we are collaborating with the customer over contract negotiation.

So we are asking them for feedback.

So which agile principle is being practised when the takes of team welcomes change in requirements even late in the development.

And it's it's quite simple. So welcoming change requirements even late.

In our retrospective, the team decides to reduce sprint duration from four weeks to two weeks for fast a feedback this reflects.

So again this this can go either way.

But so what we are trying to do here is that.

We are looking at getting the working software frequently rather than working of I mean of course working software is our primary measure of progress,

but because we are reducing the sprint, we are trying to get it more frequently.

Again, these these questions are not going to be asked in a test.

So it is more about making sure that you understand the concepts.

So there can be some conflicts which which you would need to discuss with your team members and make sure that you, you guys are, um,

aligning with respect to a specific concept of which who is responsible for

maximising the value of the product resulting from the work of the development team.

Who is? Yeah. So it will be the responsibility of the product owner.

To get the maximum value out of the team. During sprint planning.

Uh, John insists on selecting tasks for each developer.

Is this correct? As per scrum? No.

So it should be. No, this this.

No development team selects how much work it can commit to who facilitates scrum events and removes impediments that block team progress.

Well, that's obvious from master who is responsible for crafting the definition of done.

Development team. All are responsible from the team.

Every member has this responsibility with scrum.

Event is a time box opportunity for the scrum team to inspect itself and create a plan for improvements.

That is retrospective. This is 15 minutes.

During which event does the scrum team and stakeholders inspect the product increment?

And adapt the product backlog if needed. Sprint review.

What is the primary purpose of sprint planning? And define what will be delivered in the sprint and how it will be achieved.

Which artefacts is an order? Which artefact is an ordered list of everything that might be needed in the product backlog.

In backlog. And which scrum artefact provides a transparent view of the current state of the product?

Yes, that is the increment because we are talking about the product.

So the current state of the product can only be told by looking at the increment.

Which of the following best reflects the scrum approach to managing change?

So changes are embraced through iterative development and feedback.

19 is the takes of team decides to work in cross-functional roles without job titles within the team.

This is an example of. Self self-organising teams.

And the teams sprint burn down hard. Um, no I didn't.

So your scrum primer would have some examples there.

So basically sprint burn down is going to burn down your product backlog items.

And you know, it is going to tell you that a large amount of work is now reduced and at what rate it is being reduced.

Uh, it shows increasing work remaining over several days.

What should the Scrum Master do? So the down chart shows that, um, there's increasing work remaining over several days.

Oh, that means there is some backlog which was not expected.

So what should the Scrum Master do? Should they extend the sprint duration?

No, because that is going to impact the other duration, other sprints and your overall project timeline.

Reassign tasks to faster developers. How do you explain faster developers?

They may create problems as well. Uh, and and demoralise that team member.

So we don't do that as product owner to reduce scope mid sprint.

No. So the correct is correct.

Option has address impede mens and facilitate team discussion on blockers.

So whatever impediments are there whatever roadblocks are there they need to be addressed.

And then. Help the team member or the the overall team to go through that phase.

Now this means the last one. This means that the Scrum master would not know what would come out of the discussion, but there might be a solution.

So their job is to facilitate a discussion. Right.

So are there any any questions around this content? I hope you, you now know that.

What is the joy? How is it different? Um, specifics of development process.

Like, um, what are the different terminology? Uh, what is different terminology that we use in scrum?

What are our values and principles, how they relate to the different aspects of the scrum cycle?

Do you have any any questions or comments? Question.

The question number 17 was, which provides a transparent view of the current state of the product.

So implement is something that is being defined that we can go through.

Like in the moment we usually say there are five levels and all of those are working in there getting the output out of that.

Yep. Velocity chart. We can only verify how many points were being allotted.

Yep. Yep. How do we check the every metric? There has to be a review for something through which we get to know.

Or is there any particular application where the increment is being verified?

So this is actually pointing to sprint review.

So which scrum artefact provides a transparent view of the current state of the product?

Now if you if you look at it from the um, the software team's perspective, they want a working software to be available all the time.

But when. But there is no such option among these.

The only option that relates to work in software is environment, because increment is the working software that are still relevant at the end.

This is basically the view from. Yes.

Yeah. Yeah. During sprint review, you'll show that or demonstrate your working software, which is the outcome of that.

The final outcome of that sprint to the product owner and other stakeholders.

Any any other question or comment.

So I hope that you will be able to complete your assignment one as soon as possible.

Uh, if in case you have any questions or doubts, you can put them on Ed as well or directly email me.

Uh, if you want to discuss anything with me, uh, I'll be happy to set up a meeting time as well.

But otherwise, we'll meet on Thursday at 10 a.m..

You know that it's a separate venue. So do not follow the calendar.

It is, uh, building over of. I have room for 22.

Next lecture. We will have some fun as well. Be there.

Right. For the lab.

We are using the lab hours. Um, I mean, we we did a swamp thing, right?

So we like around that is 1 to 3 M on vectors.

They are. They are being treated as the lab hours, but which is actually this space?

But this space is going to be available to you for your team meetings.

There will be no other activity or the tutorial.

It will be all about if you want to utilise the space for.

So he was going to go to. Rehab?

Oh, yeah. Tomorrow morning? Yes. So that is also available to you?

Yeah. The space is available to you for your team. So basically, you really need to work on your own without, you know, needing to box office space.

Uh, any other question or comment? Okay, then.

Thank you so much. And we will meet any amount Wednesday.

Thank you. Thank you.

Uh, do you have any problems? What is there between the two of you?

