[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
How are we doing today? Good.

All right. So today we're going to talk about systems thinking.

We're going to introduce it in this lecture.

But to begin we're actually going to introduce all the administrative parts of engine 403 because there is quite a bunch.

So I want to start off running us through canvas, our canvas guide our assignments, all that fun stuff.

And then Juliet's going to answer the question, what is systems thinking?

So hopefully everybody has seen our canvas homepage. It should look fairly familiar.

Um, what I want to key you in on. First off, you will notice we have two resource pages down below.

The team project and the system's weak resources. Those will open up for the relevant week.

So they're right on the home page. You don't have to try and find them.

What you really want to focus on is the course schedule and your assessment tabs.

Your assessment tabs will walk you through what the assessments are.

Briefly they'll also tell you about lane one and lane two. And then we can take a look at our course schedule.

Now engine 403 runs differently compared to most of your other courses.

We only have seven weeks of lecture.

So you will have five weeks in the first half of the semester. We're starting off with some intro material this week, and then in weeks two,

three and four we're focussed on delivering you the most of the modules or honeycomb components of our Systems Thinking course in week five.

This is going to be preparation for the team project in weeks four and five.

We do have two compulsory lectures. Both of them are going to be on Thursdays.

And then in week six you will have your team project. There are no 403 classes that semester or that week.

When we come back from mid-semester break, we'll have a week of debriefing, the team,

project, how it went, what you can learn from it, what you can take forward. We'll have a week of preparing you for Systems Week again on Thursday.

We actually will have graduates from last year.

Come and talk to you about Systems Week, how they thought it went, what they've learned from it, what they what mistakes they've made.

They don't want you to repeat. Um, and that will be held on a zoom webinar.

And then in week nine you have systems week. And I'm going to reiterate this a few times, but that week all part four courses are cancelled.

So you only have engine 403. If you're taking any third year papers out of faculty papers, etc., you still will have those courses.

But engine 4 or 3 courses are cancelled weeks ten through 12.

There are no lectures. We will be posting an asynchronous lecture giving you feedback on how Systems week went.

So in other words, you finish up systems week and then you can wrap up your capstone courses and your part four projects.

You don't have to worry about us as much. So team project that's going to be week six.

This is the practice run for systems week. It's going to take place 8 a.m. Monday morning.

That's when you begin it. It closes at 5 p.m. on Friday.

That's when the report is still. What we do is we have a teaching or a teaching staff clinic, so there are no lectures.

Instead, the staff will be available from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. each day in the meeting room on level nine.

So come see us. Ask us any questions. Now this project is.

Designed to take students, each student on the team about eight hours over the course of the week.

Some of you may spend a little bit more. Some of you may spend a little bit less.

It depends on how you divvy it up. You're working on it alongside your other courses.

So each course is roughly 8 to 10 hours a week. Teams can work remotely, so you can be meeting asynchronously.

Discord is quite common. Zoom, Instagram.

There's quite a few ways teams will get together and talk because you are doing alongside your other courses.

You also are allowed to have meetings, place places on campus,

hold off booking anything until week five because there is an array of rooms that engine 4 or 3 students are not allowed to work in.

So I'll be releasing all of them at that point once I have the final list from all the faculties.

You can see that teams do get together. This happens to be the computer lab at level nine.

It was a favourite place for teams to work in and they're not allowed.

We're not allowed to use that anymore. Last year we had at least two teams that had campus security called on them, so do not try to work there.

Systems week is the fun one. You're going to be a large team of consultants working a very full week on a real world,

national level systems problem supporting the New Zealand government. We'll be releasing the topic for Systems Week on Friday of Week eight.

Come along if you to hear about it. We'll also be telling you all about will we have our guest, the extra guest back.

Do we know yet? Okay, so we may even have the government officials here that week.

Now, all of your part four courses are cancelled. That includes your capstone projects.

That includes your research projects. None of those meetings should be happening that week.

There are in-person sessions that are compulsory,

so each team will have about four four hours of rooms booked per day that we book for you, and you are expected to be there in person.

If you do have another place on campus, you're going to be that is acceptable as long as your team leader lets us know.

Additionally, we will have all. There will be online session sessions and other resources available when you need them.

And we will be running the clinic and we are there from 9 a.m. until 5 p.m. every day.

So we're working roughly the same time frame as you and do.

Come see us. We enjoy getting student visitors.

And one of the key things about both the systems project and the team project is everybody needs to contribute.

You are teams of roughly 30 students.

You may think that's a lot of students and not that much work.

You do need every single one of those students to help. Okay.

We are asking you for a lot. The you're trying to solve a real world, national level problem.

Now, for our other assessments, we have a field. The first one are your quizzes.

They're each worth 5%. They're going to be in weeks three and five of this semester.

We have our quiz resource pages, which you can find more information from the.

Open Thursday at 9 a.m..

They closed Friday at 10 p.m., so you should be able to fit them in around your courses and any other outside commitments you have.

You get 60 minutes to complete the quiz. Make sure to read those resource pages to see what lectures are going to be covered in what in each quiz.

I already mentioned we have those two lecture participations there, compulsory lectures on Thursdays of week four and five.

The first one is going to be a guest lecture, and then the one in week five will help you organise your team to head into the team project.

So get all of that sorted with the teaching staff there to help you.

We will be doing group member evaluations. We're calling them team Peer reviews.

They're going to take place in mid-semester break and again in week ten we'll be using a different software.

We'll be using Team-mates. So while everybody here has gotten used to the feedback fruits,

it breaks when we give them teams of more than 15 so will be using a different software.

Each student will be getting an individual link to be able to access their team peer review.

The big assignment you have going on right now is the individual goal settings.

There's two parts to that assignment right off the bat of what you're writing.

You're reflecting and setting Smart goals. Now that assignment is currently open and and it is due Monday at 10 p.m..

That assignment is a total of 4 to 600 words across both your reflection and the Smart goals you're setting.

Okay, once you submit that document on Wednesday,

you will be able to go back to Feedback Fruits and begin redoing a peer review where you

are marking your peers and your final mark will be a component of how they mark you,

how the staff marks you, and the final review or and you actually doing the marking of others.

And then the last assignment we asked you to write opens in week ten.

And this is a reflection. So I want you to reflect on your experience of engine 403.

I want you to go back to that individual goal settings. Did you complete your goals?

What learnings will you take with you from 403?

And then if we haven't mentioned it before, we do read every single one of these goal settings in every single one of these reflections.

And on top of also reading all of the set comments that we get at the end of the year.

Now academic integrity. Hopefully this is a review for most of you.

It's the honesty that you have in your studies and your assessment.

It's the key to being part of the university's academic community, and it's also a professional skill to take forward as you leave uni.

If you have any questions about academic integrity, you can go back to your canvas course on it that you should have all completed in first year.

We also have a few web pages for this on the university.

As always, if you're really unsure, just come ask us. We're more than willing to help out.

Now, with academic integrity, we have to talk about gen AI.

So many people have heard about the lane one and lane two policies that faculty instituted this past year.

Hopefully everybody. So Lane one is a controlled assessment another way.

In other words, AI is restricted. So you can or cannot use AI depending on what's going on.

We could also restrict you in terms of what calculators can you you use, etc..

The only lane one assessment we have here is lecture participation.

Okay. So you actually being here for those two in-person lectures?

Everything else would be categorised as an uncontrolled assessment.

You're allowed to use gen AI in particular for the team project and for systems Week.

We want you to actually think about where it makes sense to use it.

And we give you some examples on our campus page on how to use gen AI in this course.

Most importantly, because those are two team projects, the team has to agree on how you're using it, and if your team is using it, you must.

The team must complete a reflection of AI usage so that you would attach to the front matter of your reports that you submit.

All right. That is the end of the boring stuff, as I like to put it.

Any questions? All right.

Julia. Thanks, Amanda.

Well, the A.I. slides up. Might be worth mentioning that, um, we give both the team project and the system project to a couple of Gen AI's.

We get them to try and read it, solve it, peer review each other's output,

and create the best possible output without any human input, and then get that independently marked.

Last year it failed, so I think it got a D+.

So, um, if you're thinking that you can get AI to do these assessments, not yet.

We're going to test it every year. Um, some people obviously used it really smartly.

And we're role modelling on this slide. So that image was created with Microsoft Co-Pilot, but it's been credited, so that's absolutely fine.

If you want to create images with it, go for your life. But make sure you say that you do.

Some people use it really creatively in the early stages to brainstorm, to get ideas, to sense check.

Some people might use it to help tone and framing of their text.

Some people might use it to abbreviate when they've written too much.

All that's absolutely fine if and only if you've all agreed to do it.

You all know who's doing what, and you've really clearly stated how you use it in the statement.

So it's not a cheat. It's not a don't use it.

It's a use it smartly. And for systems thinking, as you go through your careers, AI is going to be more and more important.

So understanding what it's good at and what you need to do to make it smarter is going to be more and more important.

So I showed you this yesterday. We've ticked off the mindset and grit piece.

We won't go back to that. That's there for you to reflect on. And if it's your schtick, then dig into it with the resources we've provided for you.

And if not, you don't need to think about that one again. Except perhaps in your individual goal setting.

Today we're going to have an introductory look at systems thinking.

It's really quite a woolly term. And for those of you that like precise, reductionist mathematical problems,

it can be quite frustrating to get into it, to try and work out what it means and how you might use it.

So what I'm going to do today is give you some examples, some different definitions that come from different disciplines and different contexts.

You don't need to know them all. You just need to find the one that gels for you.

And then next week, Mark is going to, with my support for bits of it,

lead you through some of the tools you're going to need to do the team project and the systems project.

So that will be much more in your engineering comfort zone.

It will build on 303 and what you've done before, but it will really push some of the business case tools,

the management case, the economic case, the financial case. It will really push them to the limits because we will be dealing with much more woolly

and less easy to define problems than the ones you've been used to in your courses.

And then after that, we will go back and have another dig in more detail into systems thinking.

And beyond that lecture,

we'll give you some more specific tools to use systems thinking to wrap around your problem and provide inputs into those cases.

So every lecture, we'll put this up and show you where we are. We're trying to do two things.

One is give you a big new framework to think in, and the other is give you tools that might be useful within that frame.

There's not one way to solve these problems. There are many ways, so some of the tools we give you might be great and useful.

Some of them you might not like.

It'll just be up to you and your team to draw on whatever skills that you've got already, and whatever materials that we've provided for you.

So the reason that we are framing the course around systems thinking is because

systems thinking helps us to attack and hopefully ameliorate wicked problems.

So it's worth pausing to define wicked problems. Again, lots of different definitions.

They were originally defined by Writtle and Webb in 1973, in one of the most boring academic papers that I've ever read.

And they come up with ten characteristics of wicked problems that everybody goes back to.

So if you really interested, we can pop that reference up on canvas for you.

But what I've done here is tried to distil out the key elements.

And again, different people use it in different ways. But Wicked Problem isn't a loose term.

It's not just like a random adjective that's put in there.

It's used in relation to issues that are really hard.

They resist a complete solution or a simple solution.

So they seem to be unsolvable. And lots of the world's problems are in that camp.

So it's easy to spend your time solving things that can be solved.

But some of the most important issues that you might like to tackle in your careers are not going to be in the wicked problem camp.

So this course is all about getting some practice in there. As you try and ameliorate these problems, you tend to generate new problems.

So that's a really characteristic feature of these issues.

So for example, I think pretty much everyone now accepts we've got a problem with over dependence on fossil fuels.

One way to try and solve that problem is to shift to renewable energy sources,

which the world is doing in stops and starts in some parts with great gusto, in some cases going so fast that we are creating new problems.

So can anyone think of the new problems we're creating as we shift to renewables?

Anyone? You were chatty yesterday. Yes.

People losing jobs? Yep. People could lose jobs. What else?

Yep. Yeah.

It might depend on the weather. And that takes us to a really key issue, which is what?

What are we going to have to do? You can keep coal in the shed, but what are you going to need to do with renewable energy for it?

And how are we going to store it. Yeah. Batteries.

And yeah. So what? Tell us about the problem with batteries.

Uh, the the lithium in it is not is much more toxic than the cost of producing an actual automotive vehicle at the moment.

And the cars and the disposable disposing of that is not really kind of right now.

Yeah. So there's some some safety issues. There's some environmental issues.

There's some sustainability issues. Anybody got anything else expensive.

It is at the moment expensive to set up. And to your point, it's not being set up in a way that's circular.

So lots of batteries are hard to recycle. All the components are muddled up.

It costs more to get you critical minerals out than it does to dig them out of the ground.

We've got really huge problems with supply chain logistics for critical minerals.

It goes on and on and on. So that's a really good example of trying to solve one problem and creating a whole pile of other problems.

And the world is full of problems like that. So that's the territory we're in.

And we'll go more into this in lecture eight. But a wicked problem is distinct from a complex problem.

So the City Rail link is about to open.

I live on K road and I have been staring at that lovely shiny station for a long time.

It's got escalators, it's got lights, it's got signs, it's got timetables.

It is not going and it is not going yet because they are testing it.

They're testing the air con, they're testing the alarm systems, they're testing the capacity.

They're testing the systems that work out how to optimise passenger transport from one spot to another.

That is a hugely complex problem, but it will have a pretty easy to access optimal solution.

And so with the right modelling, the right computational tools, the right inputs, that's probably a complex problem.

We hope it's not a wicked problem or we've spent all that money for nothing. So there are complex problems that you can solve,

but there are wicked problems that you probably can't solve because you're going to create all these other issues.

The other thing you might see. And there's some great books on this. If you're interested in this, is there a long problems?

So Western society in particular is set up to solve short term problems, not long term problems.

So we get into trouble with climate change,

which goes for decades with social issues that keep building beyond the life of governments and quarterly reports in business.

Um, but there might not be wicked. There might just be long. So there are short and long problems.

There are simple and complex problems.

But it's fair to say that most of the wicked problems will be thinking about in this course will be both complex and long.

And so to do that, we need some new ways of thinking. We need lots of different perspectives.

As we talked a little bit about yesterday,

we need to bring diverse people together with diverse tools to listen to each other and find ways, above all,

to frame the problem so that you can do something manageable to shift the system in the right direction, even if you can't affect a complete solution.

So system can mean lots of different things to lots of different people.

Um, all systems have a few common features, so they have component elements.

There are relationships between those elements. And loosely put, the sum is the whole is greater than the sum of the parts.

So when you put all the parts together, properties emerge that you might not have predicted from all the individual components.

And they are dependent on not just the components, but the relationships between the components and to an extent, the inputs and the outputs.

So that overall system property.

Some people would refer to them as emergent properties because they emerge from the whole, and other people would call it the purpose of the system.

You'll see both sorts of nomenclature and I. That's fine.

So I thought we could just look at a few examples that, um, some of you will tune into more than others.

This one here scares me, so I'm not going to talk about that one.

But if anyone would like to volunteer, their welcome to this one down here.

Scares Amanda and probably scares some of you, but is my home turf.

So that is the metabolic map. I did my PhD on the enzymes of amino acid biosynthesis, so this lived on my wall.

I had this very complicated system, um, and the whole was greater than some of the parts.

You put in a bit of sugar or a bit a bit of nitrogen, a bit of energy, and you've got all sorts of proteins that you needed for the cell.

There are some features of the metabolic map that are really common to lots of systems.

One is where on earth do you draw the boundary? So do I draw it around lysine biosynthesis?

Do I draw it around amino acid biosynthesis or do I need to include glucose metabolism?

Should I bring in the dreaded Krebs cycle? There's a boundary issue.

It's always really challenging with these complex systems to figure out how to define the scale and scope of the system you're working on,

and that'll be a key part of your thinking. Probably everyone can relate to the musculoskeletal system.

If you're a biologist, you might think of that as a simple anatomical problem.

You might see the emergent property of that system as movement and motion.

Or if you are a sports physiotherapist, you might frame it differently.

You might say the purpose of that system is to run faster.

You might be an athletics coach, you might be trying to work out which muscle to strengthen and which ligament not to snap,

to make that person run as fast as possible. So that would be another system.

We're all using this one as we speak, I hope so.

That's the cardiovascular system again a self-contained system,

which gives us a frame in which to think about how we breathe, how our heart works, how we get energy to the body.

But obviously it doesn't work on its own. It sits in the body.

And if you were to zoom down, you would find lots of these molecules in the metabolic map.

So there's all sorts of different ways that you can look at the human body, carve out different systems,

and frame your system and your problem so that you can intervene in a way that's useful to you.

This one here we might come back to a little bit later is a water system.

So you will probably all heard people tearing their hair out in New Zealand because our three waters are a bit of a shambles.

So everyone wants fresh water, everybody needs to be able to get rid of wastewater.

And increasingly, as weather gets more extreme, we need to think about stormwater.

Those are three separate systems, but they all connect. If you want to optimise everyone getting clean, fresh water in their taps,

getting rid of their wastewater safely and not flooding in a storm, you might think of the three systems together.

If you live near an estuary, you might say, oh, hold up, what about seawater?

And that will also be connected. And most of you will know that high tide tends to lead to surges, which tends to lead to more floods.

So thinking about how to optimise water in a small population country which has a large landmass is a wicked problem that no one has yet solved.

So system will mean different things to all of you. In engine 303, I think you will have thought more about contained systems.

So maybe you were thinking about a business. Maybe they had a few stakeholders.

Probably they were going to be the customers, maybe the suppliers. So to optimise that system, you would need to think about supply chain logistics,

making sure you had all the components of something you were going to manufacture in the right quantities,

with the right stocks and ready to use a bit of resilience.

In case one component doesn't get delivered, you would need to distribute the product to the customers.

You would need the distribution networks to match the supply chain networks, and you might like to talk to the manufacturers,

the customers, the shareholders, the board, all sorts of different stakeholders within a contained ecosystem.

This year, it's going to be much more complicated. And if it's not making your head hurt, you're not thinking about it hard enough.

Your stakeholders are going to get so broad.

There might be the public, there might be local government, might be central government businesses, of course, and their customers, um, also NGOs.

So you might have activist groups that have positions.

You will definitely need to think about iwi Maori viewpoint, maybe immigrant communities depending on the problem.

Um, and I guarantee that when you're sitting there in the first week of your team project and your system project,

you will be feeling like you're getting somewhere, and then someone will say, oh, hang on, what about we haven't even thought about this?

And it's this complex swirl. It's likely that all your stakeholders are not saying the same thing.

Otherwise it wouldn't be a wicked problem. It would be a simple problem to solve.

And so you're going to need some tools to dive into the system to help you navigate through all that complexity and all those tensions.

And if you go back to that honeycomb map,

all those different honeycomb pieces will give you some tools to try and find a way into this problem to get you started.

So systems thinking. I'll give you a few definitions shortly, Um, but they all provide a context for you to think in a team and,

and a language and a whole pile of different tools.

Like I say, some of them will be useful, some of them won't. Um, these guys here work at better systems.

They're obviously using a very large piece of paper and lots of post-its as their tool.

A lot of people end up doing that in systems work. Some people do it on a miro board.

Some of those Miro boards make me really dizzy when I wander around and look at them.

But whatever you're doing, you need to find a way to all focus on the whole picture before you start to frame a problem statement

that will help you address one of the critical intervention points and move the dial forward.

As you do that, you'll need to think about the relationships between all the elements in your system the power dynamics,

which, if we're looking at government level issues, are going to be quite tricky.

There's going to be people with structural level power like ministers or local mayors,

and then there's going to be lobbyists who maybe nobody listens to or everybody listens to, might be the media.

Um, might be the communities that don't have much power, but upon whom the difference that you make will have a huge impact, and so on and so forth.

And how all those power relationships interconnect will be critical to whether your recommendations move the problem forward,

or just get it caught up in a big fight when you're recommendations land.

And as I said yesterday, in the real world, solving problems like this is going to require collaborations across disciplines.

When we put the teams together with you guys, we'll we'll make sure we've got as rich a variety of disciplines,

at least in engineering in each group, and you will all have brought your own life experience, your own internships, your own summer jobs.

Your own networks to solve the problem. So feel free to bring those to the table as well.

And anything that you think would be useful to solve the problem probably can make a contribution.

So if we don't define system, we'll have a whole pile of messages on add discussion saying what is the system anyway?

Um, when you go through the literature and try and find definitions, you'll find heaps.

And we've just included a few here, some of which will resonate with you and some of which won't feel free to use none of them or any of them,

so long as you find a way of visualising the problem that you're given.

So that top one is an early one from 1956 that tries to capture it almost in a reductionist style.

So a system is a set of objects together with the relationships between the objects and between their attributes.

You'll be glad to know I missed a bit out in the middle. For the system, there's an environment which consists of the set of all the objects,

a change in whose attributes affect the system, and also those objects whose attributes are changed by the behaviour of the system.

That is very clunky and hard to keep in your head. Also hard to read out, I've just discovered,

but it might be a useful check when you first start trying to define the scope of the problem statement that you're trying to solve.

Actually going through that checklist and saying, all right, what have I got in my system?

What's out of my system? What's in the environment might be helpful. The definition I like to use is the simple one.

So I just simply have a system as a set of connected parts that together form a cohesive whole.

I think that captures all the key elements, and it forces you to think about these issues, which are absolutely critical.

So however you've defined your system, you will have a system and you will have things that are outside the system.

If you are a project um, management consultant, you might call that in scope and out of scope.

It doesn't matter. You're trying to solve a complicated thing. Some of it you're going to tackle, some of it you're going to leave outside.

And that means that the key issue is always going to be the boundary.

What are you going to consider? What are you not going to consider? How are you going to decide what to live in and what to leave out?

So if you go back to my metabolic map, that was always a critical problem.

How big was my introduction going to be?

Am I talking about one molecule, one enzyme, one pathway, one part of the metabolic map, the whole metabolic map?

If you think back to the water system, should we just talk about drinking water?

Should we just talk about wastewater? Should we just talk about stormwater? Should we try all three?

Which ones does it make sense to keep in and out?

How big a problem can we actually keep in our heads, and how much of it can we move forward and take a bite off?

So Systems thinking is a holistic and expansive approach to looking at situations and problems.

And this is a diagram that came from Portland State,

which I think is helpful because it just puts up lots of the terms that you'll see and shows that they interrelate and overlap,

and lots of them are talking about the same thing.

So there's people who do systems research and there's people who just do practical work thinking in systems.

They will tend to describe themselves in these terms systems management, systems engineering, which you'll all have heard of.

And then there are people who use it as synonymous with complexity theory or chaos theory or fractals,

obviously critical to everything will be computer modelling and simulation for most problems,

and computational intelligence is going to play a bigger and bigger and bigger role in systems research.

As artificial intelligence becomes more powerful and your job is to work out how to use it, how to harness it, how to give the system a purpose.

Systems methodology captures the whole lot.

So when we use that term and we say that's what you're using for your team project and your system project, go for your life.

That's what we mean. If there's tools in there that are useful, then they're completely in scope.

It's up to you to bring everything you've got to try and solve the problem.

And just three more definitions for you on systems thinking.

You will see as you read that some people call it a mindset rather than a practice.

So that's just another framing. Again, some people think of the team that is solving a systems problem as a system.

Um, that's getting a bit navel gazing for me, but I can see what they're doing.

So you are creating a system to solve a systems problem.

And so it's worth thinking about yourself as that system and test to see if you are optimising the way that you are working.

A quicker way of saying that might be to say that it's a form of operations research.

It's how are you going to get stuff done?

And at the Systems Change Institute, Michael Goodman has gone as far as to say that systems thinking is also a philosophy.

It's about trying to solve the real world problems,

considering the whole not being reductionist and trying to break it down into something that's easy to solve.

But that isn't necessarily relevant to the bigger picture.

So when you get into your groups and you are given your team project and your systems project.

You will be here. There will be a whole pile of opinions.

There will be loads of ambiguity. You will have to deal with ambiguity.

There will be some people who think they've nailed it and can see it straight away.

Fast thinkers who've jumped to a solution. There might be the perfect solution, or they may have missed a whole pile of aspects.

There will be people sitting quietly in the corner going, hold up. I think they've missed something.

I can't just quite figure for the moment what it is.

Who will need a bit of quiet time and go away and have a thought, and then come back and say, you know what?

There's a whole new strand that sorts all this out.

The first thing is, we're going to have to take a breath and listen to the people who've done more deep thinking.

Come in later. You're all going to have to get used to making progress, then realising there's a fundamental flaw in your thinking and doing a reset.

And you'll all need the discipline of giving yourself a certain amount of time for that

chaos and swirl before you land in a direction that you can all agree in and move forward.

The last thing you want to do is spend the whole week arguing about how to frame your problem statements.

As you do that, you'll be thinking about technology, economic, society, people, business, maybe the environment.

Every time you throw in one of these, there's all the interrelations and there's the all important boundary around the edge.

So lots to think about. And like I say, if your head doesn't hurt and you don't feel really frustrated somewhere near the beginning,

you probably haven't thought hard enough about trying to solve the problem because these problems are hard.

This is a useful check. Sometimes people land on a solution and they're very happy because they can see what they can do,

and everybody's got a role in their own moving forward,

but then they realise that they've simplified it too much and it's not really a system anymore.

So remember to make sure you're working on a system.

You've got elements that you can define. Those are interconnected.

And the interconnections will change the properties somehow. And the overall system has a purpose.

If you look at some of the videos that we've put on canvas, um,

it's pointed out that some systems are designed for one purpose and end up having a different purpose.

So, for example, some research institutes are set up in New Zealand to break down silos and to bring people from

different disciplines and different parts of the country together to do some collaborative research.

That's their purpose. If you let them go for too long, their purpose shifts a little bit.

They already exist.

They've got their own identity, and suddenly their purpose becomes to keep getting funding to do what they're doing as an institute.

So they become the silo. So the purpose of a system can change over time, and that's something to be mindful of when you're doing your scope.

The purpose that you think the system was set up for might not be the purpose that the systems ended up with.

And I think this is a nice definition for people that want a little bit more than my simple one.

Systems thinking is a set of synergistic analytical skills used to improve the

capability of identifying and understanding systems predicting their behaviours.

That's important because you're trying to change things and devising modifications to them in order to produce effects.

So this is exactly what you'll be doing.

You'll be coming up with recommendations to government or equivalent bodies to say, we've really understood the system.

We think we've understood it well enough to predict its behaviour. We recommend you do this and it'll shift the system to here.

Sometimes you can be a little bit imaginative about how you define the elements and the interconnections.

It depends on your system,

so it's always worth having someone in the group throw around a few crazy ideas in the corner to see if you can come up with a better idea.

So one thing we did, um, with the metabolic map when I was working at the University of Canterbury, was turn it inside out.

So the metabolic map as written went. Molecule, molecule, molecule, molecule, molecule.

They were the elements. And the interconnections were the enzymes that turned one molecule into another.

And the reason it's always drawn like that is historical because we found the molecules before we found the enzymes.

But one day we sat down with the biochemists and some systems thinkers and said, what would happen if we turned it inside out?

So instead we made the enzymes, the element, and we made the interconnections, the molecules.

And we just called them signals between the enzymes. And what we got was a completely different map.

So the whole complexity of the metabolic map shrank because lots of the enzymes clustered together,

and you only needed a few signals to understand it.

So depending on your system, how you define your elements and your interconnections might help you move forward.

So I've given you lots of different entries into systems thinking.

If you like reading and you're really into this sort of thinking, I strongly recommend this book.

So required reading for everybody is just the first couple of chapters, and if you want some video support with that, there's some on canvas.

If I were sitting where you are sitting, I would read the whole thing. Um, I would say that, wouldn't I?

But I think that the whole book gives you a really good handle on how thinking in teams to solve these problems will work,

and it will give you a real head start for systems week.

So about week three, four, five people start coming up to us and saying, can you give us any tips to get ahead for our team's project.

Reading this book is the best tip that I can give you. It's very clear some things are disturbingly simple,

but it just gives you some tools for how to start thinking about the complexity of the situation that you're in.

How to break it down into its elements, connections, and purpose.

And most importantly, and Amanda will talk you through a bit of this in a later lecture,

how you might find intervention points that will shift the system in the direction that you might want.

So I'll leave some time for questions and look forward to see you tomorrow.

Thanks for coming. That's why they like this.

