[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Okay, so welcome to week one, lecture two of the course.

Arisa gave you introduction of the course in general introduction.

And by now I think you know that you are going to need teams in order to proceed with this course and then,

you know, work on the projects that you will be allocated. So how many of you have already got into teams?

Anyone who is still looking for teams. Any incomplete teams.

You can raise your hands so that. So that you can maybe find potentially find a team member here.

Okay, so it looks like most of you have made your mind.

If you have an incomplete team, you should contact Razer because he is handling the project organisation.

So it is important that you get into a team or you know your team is complete in time.

I think you have time until Sunday. So that is very important.

Uh, if you are not able to do it. Then I think Reza mentioned in lecture one that he will be randomly assigning you into teams.

Okay. So by the way, my job is to get you started with the course content and get you a foundation about the very basic concepts.

Many of these you already know. Many of these are like related to the social aspects of things.

Many of the things you already many of the things you would already know, but you may not have emphasised on them.

So I am going to take your attention to them, and then we are going to look at the agile related stuff that will be next week.

So this week I want you to focus on the concepts of project rationale,

how to build a project justification, and then how to deal with the client in the early days.

So this is what we are going to talk about.

So everything is going to start from a little project description that you are going to get when you will be allocated a project.

In fact, you have already seen them. Right. So in the list of projects you see those little descriptions.

And it is expected that by looking at those little, little descriptions,

you are able to ultimately build a software product which is clearly not justified.

Right? It is not about like what you used to see in the introductory programming courses where there was a one liner,

write a program that that checks whether this string is palindrome or not.

So it is not about this. It is about, uh, a full software product which must be working and of high quality.

So that indicates. That you need to get into more details of the things.

So if you click on contents of module one and two, the first thing that you see here is from idea to rationale.

So what you see as a project description, as a little project description is just an idea.

Now you need to expand it to get to a rationale. Now generally speaking, what is the rationale?

It is a kind of way to get to the root of the things.

Whenever you want to do a work in life as well, you want a reason for it, right?

You must know a reason. You must have a goal or a motivation. Then only you will be, you know, encouraged to put more effort into it.

So that is what is the rationale. Now the description might not be presenting you with that rationale.

Right. So if your description is too specific,

maybe 3 or 4 sentences and there are two specific that we want to product that should implement a weather monitoring system or something like that.

The question that you need to ask to the client and to your team members and to yourself is why?

Why does this matter? And who are going to be the affected parties?

Who are going to be the stakeholders who are going to be the users?

So these are very important questions that you would be expected to ask the client in your first meeting.

Now, sometimes you might feel that, you know, it doesn't look good.

If I you know, someone is asking me to do something and I'm saying why?

Why? Why do you want to do this? But that is the first core question that is not only going to give you more details about the project,

it is also going to give an impression to the client that you are more interested in developing the project.

So there will be happy. So that means the first thing that we need to talk about is when you meet the client, what do you do?

Right. But before that, you need to ask yourself and your team members, what do we need to do before we meet the client?

So you need to do your homework. But for that homework you have got just one seed.

And the seed is the description. Now that that description, you need to pick that description and think about it.

What could be a rationale or reason or motivation justification behind that description.

And you you would kind of write it down in some way.

Now this initial right up is going to be required in assignment one.

So before you meet the client you need to create a project rationale.

And this is going to be a very general project rationale for which we do not want you to do any research.

Now this project rationale must be based just on your current knowledge and your discussions within your team.

However, for assignment one you would need to do it in individually, right?

Right. You may discuss it with friends or team members or do it individually.

So I'll get to that assignment one later.

So the first thing to understand here is once you have looked at the description, you have an idea about the idea.

Do not directly jump to what needs to be built.

You still need to confine or limit yourself your thinking to the rationale of the project.

That is, you must always think that I need to be fully convinced in order to start working on the project.

So. Once you are, you know, you have read the description.

Now you are thinking that the idea looks okay or it looks great, but I would need to seek more information from the client.

For example, what are the functionalities does the client need?

Are there specific technologies that the client is thinking of making us use to build a product.

Sometimes the client may be a non-technical person.

Sometimes they can be technical, I think. Reza mentioned that they are mostly non-technical.

In your case, his hers. So that means you would you would need to ask.

You may need to ask different questions.

Now in these cases, these specific cases, generally the description that the client has built, it is coming from a reference software product.

They have seen somewhere or some other colleague, their colleague or their competitor use.

So they have written their description just based on that reference.

So you need to then write up your questions or ask your questions accordingly.

And you need to make sure that you ask, for example.

You can ask a question is this description your own idea or are you coming from somewhere else?

So the more transparent you are, the more correct information you will get.

Now sometimes the client might say that.

One of my competitors has this product already built.

I also want a similar product and from my information it was built in this technology

using this technology stack or something like or a general technology overview.

In that case, you might need to look at the core functionalities that the client has asked and then their technology recommendation.

You might end up at a stage where you see that the answer to the first two questions is conflicting,

because in your team's experience or your individual experience,

the technologies that the client has suggested do not work well to implement those functionalities.

So then you will have to count a question or put this forward to the client.

And the technologies that you are mentioning are not the best or implementing these core functionalities.

So that is the importance of asking questions. So that means the first foremost important aspect of project development is writing,

doing your homework and writing a sequence of questions that you want to ask to the client.

Right. Now we teachers know it very well, this process.

Why? Because this is the core principle of learning as well.

In a class, if the students do not ask questions, they won't learn, right?

So it goes exactly the same way I'm telling you about introducing a concept to you.

If you do not ask questions, your knowledge will be limited. So now you are on the other side, right?

You need to ask questions to the client and bring in bring out more knowledge.

Now next thing that when you start asking questions, you would realise that we all are human beings,

and what we say might not reflect what we actually want.

Right. Especially in a non-technical client, from a non-technical client's perspective,

a client is saying something and they are meaning something, and you might end up there that they are needing something else.

So what they say, what they want and what they actually need, right?

So you need to travel from what they say to what they actually need.

And to understand it better. We have this page here recording what a client says what is wants versus need.

So. There might be saying that I want to fly to my office.

I need you to build a product that, you know, flies me to my office.

So the words that they are using becomes very important.

And they might be wanting a R while their words are saying something else that they might be, you know, needing a plane or something that flies.

Right. So what they say is different from what they want. But you might end up convincing them that the office is quite near to your place.

You can just use a bike and that is what might end up as their need.

And who knows, you might be able to convince them.

So here is another example. The client says we need a calendar where users can book a class with one click.

This is a one liner. And of course you would need to ask questions in order to get that clarity.

But after asking questions, you may end up at a stage where you understand that what they wanted to say was something different.

What they wanted to say was they want a visually appealing calendar where users see available spots and book them instantly.

They imagine something like Google Calendar integration with Mobile responsiveness in drag and drop facilities.

Right. So you by asking questions, you get to a point.

Now you understand what they want. And the next stage would then be to get to what they need okay.

This is what they want. But given our resources, our limitations, and given the project cost and other stuff.

They might end up needing just these main functionalities.

So hence I said that it is a journey from what the client says, which you have as a description of your project to what they actually need,

Which you will have as a list of or a set of product backlog in in scrum.

So you start with sales and then get to product backlog, which is the actual needs.

Now note that. If the client is technical enough.

They what they see and what they want. Could be overlapping. Could be same.

Similarly, what they want and what they need could be the same.

Right. So it depends upon. So you still need to carry out those discussions to make sure that ultimately you get to the actual needs.

Okay. Right.

So any questions around this? Do you understand what this first part was about?

You know that your product owner and clients are the same. Right.

So in these projects, um, generally in the real world, the client would be the user, actual user of the product.

We can call it a customer or a client. But then, um, if you have the same person acting as product owner and client,

then and product owner is generally a representative of the client that will be handling or, you know, kind of monitoring the project development.

Uh, so they will be, uh, building that communication Between the client and the team.

We will talk about agile and all the terms next week as well.

These days, this is such a happening topic from the last 15 years or so and that you.

I'm sure you would have heard about these topics somewhere or you might have used them.

So any questions up till this point? Right.

So now you know that you need to get to the bike okay.

If the client is saying something else.

Okay, now, the next thing that I talk I want to talk about is these three things are rational purpose and justification.

So we begin with rationale. So.

The rationale is going to be discussed in two steps.

In the first step you want to get to a set of high level rationales for the project.

And then in the second stage you want to back up those high level rationales with evidence that you have collected through research.

The first part of the rationale is to be done on a dummy project description.

I am going to give you, which is basically, um,

so I am going to give you a set of project descriptions from a couple of years back, and you may pick one of those and work on it.

And then for assignment three we will do so.

This will be assignment one. And then we will go to assignment three where you can actually work on your own project.

Because until that time you will be allocated your project and complete your second part of the rationale,

which will be backed by some research on your real project description.

So when we talk about the high level rationale, basically we are trying to answer these two questions.

So given the idea of the description that the that the client has given you, you will say, so what right.

What difference is it going to make? Why is it important to build this project.

So that means, for example, if the client has given has asked you to, um,

build a software application, which is which is this example would be a real here,

a system rather than a simple software application, but a system that can monitor the speed of melting of ice caps Somewhere on the planet.

If this was the project, that means you need to develop an application that will measure that speed of ice melting at a specific.

So you would need some sensors and, you know, and then some data analysis and stuff.

Now you need to ask why right.

Why does the client need this project. And when you do your homework because you have not yet met the client.

So you do your homework, you might think that okay, this might be related to climate change.

And any other upper level higher level you can go to.

So maybe you can start with the planet and the climate change.

And then global warming might be one of the reasons of climate change.

And then slowly coming to that specific idea.

Right. So that means there might be like a 8 to 10 bullet points starting from the climate change and global warming.

And then. There can be others who would be talking about who cares.

So you start with sowhat and then think about who cares.

That is. If this software project is done, if it is completed, this product is built.

Who is this going to help or effect?

So whether they are, whether it is environment, whether it is people, whether it is an it,

whether it is community, whether whether it is your family foretells.

Right. So who cares. That is, who are going to be the ultimate beneficiaries.

Real beneficiaries of this product. So combine these two and you will get your high level rationale right.

Start with climate change and then global warming.

Then communities or human being and life as general and move on.

Now the final thing for building this initial rationale will be.

A specific flow of things. So it is very important that the rationale flows well from high level to low level.

And each bullet point is connected to each other so they are flowing properly.

So the previous bullet point is feeding into the next one and so on.

I'll give you some examples as well. For now you can read this one.

It is not presented in the form of bullet points which is required for assignment one, but you can at least get some idea.

So technology is becoming increasingly pervasive in many aspects of society.

So so so the highest level. Our rational point is that the technology is increasingly becoming important.

and then we move on. This is your last thing that is your lowest level rational,

which is saying that it is therefore important to build people's confidence in engaging with technology to improve their way of life.

Now, note that I haven't given you a description of this rationale.

It may be that the client wants to build a software product that will help non-technical people engage with technology.

Right. So basically, we are getting from the highest level rationale to this low level rationale without touching the product description.

Now, it is very important to note that for assignment one and for this higher level rationale, none of the points must talk about the product.

It must only be about the rationale.

Now. Let me go through these and then I'll come to assignment one.

And then we can talk about it as well. And I'll give you some time to work on it.

I think I must have. Okay.

I'll come to the example. Another example as well. But let's talk about purpose, which is the second topic.

Um. That follows rationale very well.

The previous rationale, you can also understand it as a bigger picture of the domain as well.

Because we have we are not touching the the product. So you can call it a bigger picture of the problem or the bigger picture of the domain.

Just a minute. So I need to relate it to the example that I'm also going to tell you in a in a moment.

It is very the next step would be important in the sense that we are still trying to understand.

We are still not getting into the details of the project, the actual product that we are going to build.

But looking at the higher level now, we need to look at the purpose of the little bit that we are trying to do because the product,

for example, if I am building an application that is going to be there to measure the speed of ice melting.

You cannot say that by building that product, I will be able to solve the global warming problem.

It can contribute a little bit to that problem, to solving that problem, or it can't be a large scale solution to that problem.

So that means the higher level rationale,

the relation between the highest level rationale or your core problem that you have ended up understanding, or your why.

The relation between that why and That product that the client is asking you to build.

They must have a relationship. It is very important that they have a relationship which you can present as a purpose.

And in most situations, that is going to be a just just that little bit,

a very minute bit of the overall solution that you might be targeting in future or, or humanity might be targeting in future, really.

So that is very important to understand. So that is the purpose of the project.

That is so basically you are making sure that there is a clear relationship between the rationale and the project that that is going to be built.

Okay. The third bit is justification. Now, deciding about the rationale of the project and the purpose of the project is a separate thing.

And then justifying it against the resources that are available to you is a different thing.

Whether I have that big team that is able to, you know, develop that application, whether we have that budget,

whether we have that time, all the other resources you need to consider in communication with the client.

So that is going to build a justification of the project.

Basically this is this is also known as business case for the project.

Okay, so whether the project building that project is feasible or not.

So here is an example for these three.

So I want you to read through these so that you also understand how do we write about them.

First the rationale that is the broader context and underlying need.

And you'll see that here is a here is another example of a justification, because, you know,

a justification can relate to existing applications as well, because the solution has worked for other competitors.

A similar solution might work for them as well. So this can be a part of a justification.

And when you write these things, it is very important that the words that you are putting in here,

each and every word, has a meaning clear in your mind.

For example, saying that a mobile application is accessible, you should understand what that means.

Scalable and cost effective. Something that can scale in future if there are more users, for example, and accessible to everyone.

And cost effective. So. Do you guys understand the difference between these three?

Any questions? This project is about food and security.

I hope you have got the crux.

And how can we build an application that enables individuals and small businesses, businesses to share this surplus food?

And a note that from where we start as a high level rationale.

So when we see this so you can say that the purpose will be the closest thing to the description

that you have been given from the client when you read your allocated project description.

You are basically looking at the purpose rather than the other two.

Okay. Do you have any questions? You understand this?

It is an easy concept. Yes. You know, the terms may be, may be and may be new or, you know,

but once you see those examples and then start relating to your allocated project, it will be easier.

So what we can do now is. You will see that on modules there is a quiz for you.

Uh, I think there are five questions. So you can attempt this quiz.

It is basically for having a better understanding about what the client is versus wants versus needs.

So you can go and attempt it. It is available from canvas modules you can attempted.

I will just go back and show you again. So you can click here.

Do you see it? No. Okay. Sorry.

Not okay. Okay. Let me quickly.

So what do you see in student view? Okay.

What do you say about the first one? And describe the solution and vague terms without specifying actual requirements.

They are primarily expressing what the client says.

Okay. So whenever there is a description or they describe something or they are saying something so that golden do what they are telling you in words,

I initially request a dashboard with real time matrix.

So you see that it is quoted again. This is what the client says.

But through discussion it becomes clear that they envision an interactive, customisable and analytics platform.

So still it is what they envision. So what they want is clear.

Right. So this is says versus want.

Next is it is discovered that client's actual business requirement is to improve decision making

through accurate data visualisation regardless of the UI complexity they initially described.

So they initially said something, but ultimately it is realised that their need is something else.

So he is in need. A client insists on developing a fully custom built CRM system so they know what they want, and they want his being presented here.

And after analysis, their needs come up.

Right. So you now know about their needs. And finally the client requests a mobile apps.

Or they are telling you about what they want. User.

So after user research you will get to know the needs again. So it will be a wants and needs.

So basically this is to help you again revisit the difference between the three,

so that when you carry out those discussions with the client, you know what you are after.

Right. So let me go to the modules again.

So you will see that I have made available.

I have made available as a file here. Are you able to access it?

So you will see that there are these projects. I think they are from 2024 or even, um, maybe 2023 or 2024.

Yeah, 2024. What you need to do is you need to randomly pick one of these projects.

So you will see that when you click on them. It will open once a.

Year. So I will see that there is a project description.

Now for example this one is a longish project description.

Now these are similar to what you have received for this year as well.

And again these this is your idea from where you can start.

So this will be the closest thing to the purpose of the project.

And you need to go up to the rationale And go down to the justification.

Right. So what you can do now is. Work on.

To come up with a set of n bullet points that will define the rationale of this project description.

So before you do that, I'm going to take you to the assignment assignment page.

So the assignment is already available. Or this link might not be working as updated.

But the project CIP is available from modules.

And this is of course your current project. So do not work on these as yet.

So I will need to update it as well. Okay. Anyway, so go to assignment one.

So I will let you know what is expected of you. So first of all, of course you need to note the due date which is 30th of July or today is.

So it will be in the middle of next week or next week Thursday.

I have already mentioned what is required of this assignment.

So you need to infer, identify and explain underlying rationales from minimum project descriptions that are available.

You need to critically examine online information to illustrate project

significance and organise your investigation into concise and convincing flows.

These are the things that you need to do. Now the part critically examine online information here.

That is the second bullet point.

It is just for understanding what you are writing and not about, um, you know, providing evidence that will come in assignment three.

So for example, if you, you are coming up with some bullet point for, for many projects, for example,

when you read the descriptions, you might not be aware of the terms that are being used.

There might be some scientific terms or any specialised. So you would need online assistance in order to understand it.

So the second one is basically about.

And then when you get to the rationale as well, those bullet points, you you need to make sure that what you are writing you.

You know what you are writing. So you would need online assistance from that perspective.

Now these are known as speed rationales. And these are known as speed rationales for a reason that you do not need to refer to too much evidence.

You just just need to discuss. And based on your current knowledge, you need to write those rational points.

Now this is what you need to do from the lists that I have provided to you.

You would need to pick three project descriptions, each one of you.

And write your answers in the allocated space and canvas because these are quizzes.

So when you click on assignment, you will see that it is again in the form of a quiz.

So you can start attempting it. I'll come back to that.

So there will be different sections, for example, for project one, two and three.

There will be different sections. So you need to write your rationale bullet points in those sections.

You must not go beyond 200 words. 200 words is is a large limit that I have given you.

You are going to probably end somewhere around 100 or 120 or something because, um, you, you can target to have like, say ten bullet points.

So each bullet point must finish in one line or one at least one sentence, so don't go beyond one sentence.

So it should be one sentence only. So you can see that each bullet points at most a single line.

If you go beyond one line and still are a in one sentence, it is.

It is acceptable. But. Um.

Yeah. So make sure that that you read these points.

And when you are writing them up, you, you're following all these instructions.

Do not use personal language. So when you are writing about, for example, the ice cap melting.

So you will be writing it like the climate change is becoming a major problem for the.

And it's something like that. You won't write like.

I think that, you know, so don't don't use a personal language because that will have penalties.

So again note that you do not need to do any literature review at this stage.

For assignment three, you will be required to do it because assignment three is a starter for your project.

So you are actually starting your project, so you are doing some work towards the project as well as assignment three.

So don't talk about hard. What you you like, right?

So use a professional language. When you are talking about who cares?

Make sure that you are talking about the relevance to a stakeholder.

As I mentioned, a community or some other audience.

Your bullet points must not have any discussion about the solution that is the product.

You may do some research, for example, to provide some numbers or stats to back up your rationale in that one line.

For example, you might say that recent research has shown that.

The global sea level rise is this centimetre or something?

Right. So you can you can mention it, but don't go into too much of details or that that part is not assignment three,

but in one liner if you want to, you want to add a data point somewhere to back your rationale.

You can do it. So about gen AI.

Now, um, I do not know.

But maybe in future we won't be. We won't even be eating our food ourselves.

And AI will be helping us to eat the food.

But we need to be very careful with the use of AI and relevant tools.

So assuming that you guys are already taking advantage of ChatGPT and AI tools, I am going to guide you through how I expect you to use,

for example, ChatGPT in order to complete the assignment faster and more accurately as well.

Now I am going to give you a demo of this later.

Let me complete this, and then I'll give you some time to look at your projects and you can start working and then we'll get to that.

Okay. About the submission. This is a quiz. So all you need to do is do it on canvas.

Start the quiz and there will be sections and embed your answers there.

Remember to use bullet points in the text boxes there.

There are options for bullet points. Here is the marking rubric.

So in total 15 marks 3% of the course.

The content has 12 marks, four marks for each of the projects, each of the three project descriptions.

Your. So what should be apparent? Who cares should be apparent.

And there must be a clear flow between the points and there must not be anything related to solution.

Plus there must not be any personal or casual language. The grammatical spelling errors, nothing.

You won't believe. But we give you marks for using ChatGPT, right?

So. But what you need to do is you need to write a little reflection about how and why did you use it.

So you are free to use it, but you need to mention what prompts you use, right?

So what prompts you used and why did you created those prompts?

So just write a little reflection about it.

If you use ChatGPT. And leave this section empty.

Generally we won't have any way to identify that. Right.

So it is important that I mean it is going on trust.

If you have used it or text there, if you don't use it, if you use it and do not mention it there.

Or in case you prefer not to use it. Both are allowed.

You can do that. You can prefer not to use it.

So ending up writing everything on your own, or you have used it and have not put anything in the box in the DVD.

Reflection. If you say that you have not used it, if you haven't.

So in both these cases, what I am going to do is because that box is empty.

I'm going to avoid these two marks. Allocate these two marks to the rest of the sections.

Right. So these two marks will be allocated to the rest of the sections.

And so I advise you to. So.

So the best way would be to take the help of Gen AI wherever needed and mention it right?

Then there will be penalties on the language that you use.

There are some late submission penalties as well. So 10% penalty for 0 to 12 hours and then so on.

So you can follow these as well. There is no reason to be late.

You still have a lot of times completed in 1 or 2 days.

And it should be done. Okay.

Do you have any any questions about what I have talked about?

Assignment one. Anything that you didn't understand or want clarification about?

Okay. So I now give you some time to look at a pick your three projects from the list.

Uh, I assume this is not list. I assume that you have already.

You can access the zip file.

Let me know if this is not accessible. If you can access it.

I have to pick three projects and start working on at least one of them during this next 15 minutes.

On the assignment page you can see these four And let me quickly.

Meanwhile, I'll update those links for you so that there is no confusion.

So there are four sections on the quiz page, three for the three projects, and then the chat reflection.

You can access them on your devices and start working.

It would be good to write the bullet points for, say, one of the projects and then go to the second third.

Okay. Uh, looking at time. Um, I have one little thing that I need to go through.

So what I'm going to do is I'm going to pick one project from these.

And because I have already worked on this one. So I am going to pick this one.

We have CO2 monitoring. I am going to click on this.

Okay. Sorry about that. So I picked this one because it has a limited description.

So that means you have more scope for working on getting to a rationale.

So this is a research project which is going to which involve system development

as well as software development as well as some research and data analysis.

Everything is involved here. A novel behavioural monitoring system for beehives.

Now, what I will do to save time is I'm going to copy this project description.

And take it to ChatGPT, for instance. Now I'm asking ChatGPT to write a project rationale for the following project.

And here is what it gives me. Now see from where it starts.

Honeybee populations play a vital role in global ecosystems and agriculture through pollination and so on.

Right. So you see that highest level rationale, which should give you a sense of purpose for the project.

Right. Why is it important? So what that is it answers or what and keeps on answering that.

However, be health and behaviour are increasingly threatened by environmental stressors and so on.

Now, in comparison to what I have asked you to do for assignment one, what are the differences here?

Number one, these rationales are not in bullet points.

These are not one liners.

These are also talking about the project itself, the product itself, the solution itself, which I have asked you not to include.

There will be details that you may avoid because you want it to be very concise set of bullet points.

So what the project will comprise, it is also talking about that.

So we do not want to include it.

So next what we do I ask it rationale should be based on bigger picture vision only what impacts it has on the global scale or local community level.

So I'm asking it to bring in who cares? And so what right.

Do not focus on the implementation detail. I'm also asking it to avoid bringing in the solution.

Now you will. I am not going to do that, but you can compare it with its previous reply and see what change is here.

Still, it is not in bullet points. Of course you can give it all the instructions at once as well.

Or this is to let you understand that if you do it without the use of JNI, what what process or flow of thoughts you need to consider, right.

Going from a higher level and then, you know, reducing that detail into a more concise points.

Then I am telling it to get to key point series in in the form of bullet points.

Now it gives me some bullet points. It starts from these are essential to global ecosystems and food security and so on.

However, if you look at it, if you look at the flow.

You will see that it still includes the points about the project.

The project supports this.

So again, although you you mentioned about implementation, so it did not get to the implementation, but still is talking about the project.

So do not. So I asked it not to include any points about the project.

And then it gives me. Another set of bullet points and starts from pollinator pollinators like bees are vital and

then global bee population and then improved understanding of bee behaviour and so on.

However, when you look at it closely, you might not agree with the flow of the things.

Whether an upper level rationale is at higher level, actual higher level or not.

So you need to see that that you start from the highest level rationale and then go to a lower level rationale and finally end at the lowest level.

So see, I then ask you to make sure that there is a proper flow.

And you will find that there is a proper flow now. Now see, that heart starts from a healthy planet.

Depends on a on stability of ecosystems and biodiversity.

It went one level up as well. Earlier it was starting from honeybees.

All pollinators. Now it is starting from a healthy planet and ecosystems.

Right. So it is starting from who cares?

The planet cares, for example. And then you know. And then you will also note that the the who care elements.

And so what elements can be placed at any position in the.

So it will depend upon your project descriptions or there is no definite place for a position for these two in the list.

You can have them anywhere. Okay.

So this is this is how you can use an AI in order to save your time, but still get to more accurate rationale as required by assignment one.

Now, note that Risa mentioned this in lecture one that if you decide to use an AI, you need to own what you submit.

Even though it has come from an AI, you need to own it.

You need to say that I have done it. So you cannot say that.

Jenny, I gave me this and hence hands off.

So that's that's not going to work. So that means once you get that list, you need to read it here fully and justify it in your own mind.

It. Yeah. This I agree to this and I can submit.

Oh! Let me. Hear.

Oh, this is your one page. Um, you need to start the quiz.

And then there are four text boxes, three for each of the projects.

In order to put the bullet points for each project rationale.

And then there is a fourth one for entering the ChatGPT reflection.

Once you do that, submit the quiz. And that is all.

