[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
This is going to be about making or manufacturing paper planes.

So we will be manufacturing planes, which will be made of paper and will try and fly them all around the room.

So this is what we are going to do today. So what I am going to do now is I am going to take you through the rules of the game.

Before we do that, I want you to sit in teams of three or whether you have you are real team members here or not?

Is here teams of three. So you have four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, 11.

So we can have like, um, three teams of three and one team of two.

Help me organise yourself. Yeah. You are three.

Who? Who wants who? Okay, let's do one thing.

I expect that maybe one more person will come.

Okay, good. So you can stay as two if you guys can.

Feel free to make three members. I know it is sad that you need to break up from your member, but it will help Anyway.

Thank you for your sacrifice. I appreciate it.

And you are going to have one more, right? Okay. So we are going to have over three member teams.

I'm having. Okay. Good. So we are going to have that as our second projector.

We have our third member of this team.

By the way, here we are forming three member teams. Okay, so let's begin talking about the rules of the game.

Are the targets. The learning objectives that we are looking at from the game is that we want to understand these scrum roles.

We want to experience how the sprints are to be done.

We want to learn about velocity, which will be, in our case, number of paper planes that you will create during each sprint.

So number of points. So we treat one paper plane as one story point.

So that would mean the number of story points,

the number of planes you will manufacture will be equal to the number of story points you will be able to do in one sprint.

And then we will reflect upon your experiences and teamwork.

Rather your experiences both in teamwork as well as the actual process.

This is what you need to do. You would need to design, build and deliver paper aeroplanes during sprints.

You need to deliver as many high quality planes as possible to meet the customer needs.

We will define what is high quality. And you must use the scrum framework as we learned last time.

I am going to give you as a product owner. So I am going to play as your product owner.

I am going to give you a set of acceptance criteria which your products must achieve.

In your teams. Please pick one Scrum Master which is very important so they must be able to facilitate things and remove any obstacles.

If you have them during the sprints.

And then the team members, of course, are there to talk, design, build and then test hyperplanes.

Now it is up to you that if you want to. Define certain roles within your team.

For example, one member might be a better paper plane creator who might have more experience with it.

There might be another one who who is a good test of the paper plane.

I will tell you how the testing is to be done. So we have one of the teams as a four member team.

I am happy with this arrangement now. Now what you are going to get, you are going to get 33A4 paper sheets for each sprint.

So you are going to get these A4 sheets and I'm going to give you only three for a sprint.

Now you can hear them off. You can create as many paper planes as possible so that that's your decision.

There will be the sprints and the different activities will be time boxed.

So I am going to give you time. We will have a stopwatch. So you need to follow that.

And then there will be open space for flight testing.

That means we need to fly our planes. Okay. Now here is the time of saying or sprint planning.

You are going to get three minutes or sprint execution.

You're going to get five minutes. Sprint review and demo.

We might, um, we might look at more time than this.

And then the sprint retrospective, which is again going to have five minutes.

Now the acceptance criteria your plane must fly straight.

Without any spins during the flight.

And it multiplies it for a distance of up to 2m or 2m would be like this distance here.

So what I'm going to do is I'm going to let you fly them from, for example, here to at a project.

I'm going to give you something. Um, we have ample space here, so maybe if I don't want to use this, then we can use another wall.

But. Yeah. So until the distance this is the acceptance criteria.

So and then. Note that I'm going to look at each plane.

And I'm going to give you a pass or fail on aesthetics as well.

Sound good. Who has experience with paper planes before this.

Oh this is. Each accepted plane will count as one story point.

We will be counting how many points you deliver a sprint.

And you can use this. I'm going to ask you about your estimation after your first sprint planning.

So you are going to give me a number. We are going to build these many paper planes.

I'm going to note it and then we'll see how many you pass.

Okay. Okay.

If or when I am going to distribute so that you know that what material you have.

I am going to give you three sheets. This is going to be a very serious business.

So he is a fourth member then. Okay. You can join them.

No no, no, don't worry about it. These are temporary groups. Let me know if you get more papers.

No cheating. Only three three sheets allowed.

And. Does anyone know how?

Important it is. To watch people.

Yes. Okay. All right. So we are going to begin the sprint planning.

That was not not part of the planning. So here we go now.

During the planning, you now know the task. You can discuss about your roles.

And primarily what I am going to ask you is going to be about the estimated story points.

That is the number of paper planes your team is targeting for sprint one.

So that is what is going to be an outcome of your five minutes planning for me or your own team.

It can be any other discussion like what role you want to play, what strategy you would you would want to take up.

And any, any teamwork risks that you see here.

So all those things uh, you can also talk about whether you, you guys understand that ask equally.

You know, everyone understands what is to be done, how are you going to utilise the time and so on.

So I would like to take so I'm giving you more time for planning I promise.

Three minutes. But I'm giving you five minutes of these.

These are the times that you are going to get. So here we go.

Of our or is we are going to give even EMS or you are a okay.

Are you guys a team? B you as a team.

B who has a team? C you are team D.

Yeah okay, I know that we have.

Yeah. Maybe I'm just watching a video.

Maybe. Yeah. Yeah.

I mean. It's not that I.

Don't know how. Being a part of what makes me so.

Happy. But even if you didn't get it.

You haven't seen it yet. Oh, yes. Oh.

I don't know if that's been ambitious to do more. On paper.

Yeah, that's why we have. To start doing that.

Yeah, I think so. Oh, yeah. And so what?

Oh. Yeah.

Yeah. Do you think. It's something you want to be working.

On. this was designed to say. Yes, as well as.

The best. Yeah. I feel like, you know, it's going to be a matter of time.

I don't think so. This is the same thing.

By. The way.

I'm. Not exactly sure.

I think. That. Well, if we can.

Just make sure you're right.

Okay. Yeah. Is that what you want?

Yeah. Oh, yeah.

Oh, yeah. As soon as I just. Oh.

Yeah. I think this is one guy going to make it on the same time.

Okay, so the following. Saturday.

Yeah. Yeah. Next time. You guys do that one.

Okay. Okay. Oh.

And. I think that's what.

It was. And we'll see. I'll see. I didn't say anything.

I mean. It's the same one, I think.

Yeah. I didn't know. You had a place.

I didn't. Hear you.

Okay. Time is almost up. Okay.

Thank you. How was your sprint? How are your sprint?

How was your sprint planning? Hey.

What? What are you? Estimated two points. Three.

The things. If. We have planned, like three story points for this.

Three planes. What about team?

See? How many?

How many? Can you say on that side so that, you know, facing.

So you have three. Right. Three.

What about team D? Eight.

Okay. Thank you. Here we go.

Although. You are free to test them.

If you want to test them, you can do anywhere safe.

Just pick a safe spot and do that in the room. Just pick a safe zone and you can do that.

You know the rules. This to do? Yep. Yep.

All right. So. Yeah.

So what do. You want to do?

I think this side is if you can, you can.

Yeah. Oh.

0000000. Make sure that you don't.

Don't hit anyone. So TMD has just hit EMC.

That's not good. The reason I don't like the most is the people.

Oh. You have 2.5 minutes.

What do. You think it will be?

So feel free to test them here. You can test them here as well in the open area.

Yeah. You have under one minute.

Please give. Me your.

Time. Oh, yeah.

For you. I think it's okay.

I think it's for everyone. Thank you, thank you. Okay.

Thank you. The time is up. So next what we are going to do.

Time is up. Time is up. You can't carry on.

Oh. He may. Please bring in your products.

And the product owner would want to see.

So you can consider this as a sprint review. So team A will be having a sprint review now.

Oh has that look good. I like this plain. Let's see. Okay.

Of course. Oh please go in. Yes. So what you need to do is stand on that side behind the chair.

The green one. Yeah. And we are going to see.

whether it is straight and without spin. So that fails.

Yes. Have a look. Yes. This one? Yes. This one.

Oh, it looks good. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.

From here to here. So that everyone comes here as well? No.

Okay. Straight and no spin. So it crashed.

Oh. May I have a look? Yeah, it looks good.

Oh. Oh.

Okay. I'll accept it. Thank you. And your team here.

So you promised three. And you have one. UST thank you.

Okay. Team B. Okay.

Okay. Okay.

Okay. Looks good. Can you first. Is this one. Or is she going to be a specialist tester?

Behind the chair. Is it okay?

Is one done? Uh, I need to have a closer look.

Thank you. And this one as well.

Okay. Something new with that. Okay. These are not clean Wars anywhere.

Okay, then. That's why. Okay.

Thank you. This might be risky.

This might not go anywhere. Ah.

It's fun. So it fails. The aesthetics failed for this one, so it was low on aesthetics as well as there was a little spin.

So I'll give you two. Yeah.

Thank you. Team B, team C, please bring in your manufactured planes.

Thank you. Looks good. Please go in. Okay.

Go ahead. Very nice. This one here.

Do you have aerodynamics experience or something like that?

Oh, it's one of. The skills.

This one. Okay. Okay. Thank you. Oh, the product owner would want you to demonstrate it again, please.

Yeah. I'll take it.

Yeah. Thank you.

Ames. E and D.

On many planes. Oh.

Nice. So I have had a look at all of them.

Yeah. Yeah. Okay. So how many are these?

One. Two. Three. Four. Five. Six. Nine. Nine.

One. Two. Three. Four. Five. Six. Seven. Eight and nine. Please go and test them.

Okay. So team D has come up with nine.

They promised eight. Sorry. So can you test it again, please?

Once again? Yeah. Yeah.

Try not to do it like odd. So it's fun.

This also is fun. So let me first note that.

Uh, next. Are you going to test it? Next?

Yeah. See? So then go straight.

All three. Next.

How many remain? Three.

Okay. Okay.

I'll get. This one.

So. Thank you, team D.

So after sprint one. This is what we have.

So team A estimated three.

What one. Team B estimated three equal to.

Then he three two again. So. And finally team D who promised eight and got three.

Now the next step will be your sprint retrospective.

That is you will get five minutes to discuss within your team about how the first sprint went and what changes you can do in your next sprint.

You are again going to get three sheets. The acceptance criteria would be slightly different.

So what I'm going to do now is I'm going to give you the acceptance criteria.

And then you can start your start your spin sprint retrospective.

Rather, it would be better if we first do sprint retrospective, and then I'll give you additional time for sprint planning.

So we will go on with the loop. Okay. Which is more natural.

So let me start the clock again. Okay.

Please discussing about your first sprint. I believe.

In the data. That.

Comes. To us.

Because this seems reasonable. This is how we go.

About it. We all want to be here at the end of the day.

But now. So just.

To be. Honest. I don't.

Like it. And it's.

Great. Yeah. Yeah.

You can just go over there. Okay, fine. You know what I'm doing.

But I just. Want to do something.

Yeah. You do. But. I think.

We have. To.

Have a different. Thank you. I'll leave that for.

You okay? That was good. Yeah.

Yeah. Yeah.

Okay. Okay. All right.

All right. You have about one more minute.

Yeah. Yeah. All right. Thank.

I thought so. So now this game.

This. This game will be just like this. Okay, the time is almost up.

So the first thing I would want is I would need to collect all the previous planes

so that you can start working with the others and don't use the previous ones.

Maybe. Is that it? Just. It's just the outcome. I need to make sure everyone is equal.

All the previous ones. Oh. What are these papers?

Okay. Thank you.

Okay, now you are going to get additional material.

Now, as a product owner, I have just decided to give you four sheets rather than three because I need more products.

So this is an example of change.

A change in requirements. Order.

See how many? More.

Okay. Your time for planning starts now.

Okay. Okay. So do your sprint planning for the second sprint.

Oh, sorry. I needed to get your. Sorry, sorry.

Sorry. Um. I need to get your emails first.

So. Or that will be after planning.

Sorry. So let's. Anything else that we need to do for that?

No. One thing that I need to show you are the requirements, right?

So one change of change in requirement instance.

You've just seen that I've given you four sheets. I.

Okay. I'll probably tell you what is needed, I think. That's right here.

So in sprint two there is one additional requirement. There are two additional requirements.

One is that you will be given a target to hit.

So that will be. So I am going to display it here as a circle right.

So you would need to hit it. And the second would be your planes must have your your company logo.

So these are the additional requirements. Now you can start discussing them.

So you don't really. Know?

Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um.

Wait. So does that mean that the spinning wheel is still. Yes. Okay.

Yes. Yep. That's a good question.

So the previous rules still apply that the distance will be two metres.

Must go straight and without spin. And when?

The wind is possible.

That these people will be different. I. Want to make.

Sure that. You do that for me as well.

Thank you for that. Okay. You have your target.

I got it. Okay.

And I've been. Looking at how to create something.

But if you really need it. Half a minute.

30s. Is that?

Okay. Time is up. Thank you.

Time is up. Please. Top. An important aspect of scrum is that we never alter the sprint lengths, so they must be exactly the same.

Okay. So let's. Oh, I.

Know. Are we going through sprint planning?

Planning? Okay okay okay. So I see that you guys were already manufacturing your plane, so I thought that we were already in the sprint.

Okay. How many? Are team B?

M? C? Y.

Okay. So what I see here is that you guys have already built the planes.

Do you still want that sprint to go? Okay.

So let's. So what I'm going to do is I'm going to give you lesser time.

So I'm not going to give you more than three minutes, because we also need more time for discussing this stuff as well.

So here we go. This is.

Yeah, I'm, I just I think I lost track.

I gave you time for planning. Right. Previously. Yeah.

You you already you. So you are happy with your first help, right?

Because that will create false. Right? Okay.

Yeah. So you hold it.

Yeah. Yeah. You know what I'm saying?

I. Okay.

Okay. One more minute. Thank.

You very much. I think we. Will do the one.

Okay. You guys. Are going to go.

Oh, okay. Okay. No.

That's okay. That's right. It's not like we did something. I don't.

Think so. Okay. I think I'm going to do it.

Okay. Time is up. He may. Please bring your products.

All the others. Please stop building them all.

Anything during the planning? No, no, no. That's too.

Spring time is over. Okay.

Hey. Oh, okay. Yeah.

Okay. Please go ahead and just. I'll have a look at all of them together first.

And yeah, so you have got it, as you promised.

Is o n s m is. You're the best.

Yeah. Okay, let's see how it goes with time.

Oh, sorry. You got to hit head. Hit the. Let me see.

This should be enough. Yeah. Yeah, yeah.

000. Missed. Missed.

He's trying. Yeah. That's okay, that's okay. Oh, nice.

Oh that's right. Oh.

It's nice. So as for what?

Good job. Thank you team.

And next is team B. Pilot error.

Team B. I would need to have a look.

Oh, yeah. Yeah. But if I does fly right.

Yeah. The arrows overhead. Make sure it's a plane on all fours.

Is that the logo thingy? Um.

That's nice. Okay. Go ahead. Yeah.

Yeah. Thank you. Okay.

So, yeah, you have five in total. Okay.

So. Thank you. There was one us.

Thank you. You may now. So with the product owner because you are demonstrating.

And if you know something fails on the first try, the client is going to be bothered about it, right?

So that is something that instead of doing it.

That's the best part. Yeah. Okay.

Next. Emcee. So, what is your logo?

Oh, no. Logo. Okay.

Hey. You forgot to do your logo.

All. All of you forgot. So that is that is one thing that you can note, right?

Everyone shares equal responsibility of understanding the requirements.

Okay. Good.

So do fail. Thank you.

and MD. Thank you.

MD had promised five who assumed that they have five.

Okay. What? Six? Back.

Okay. What does this. Oh. Oh, okay.

Okay. Oh, okay. Nice.

Okay. Got six. Hey.

Thank you. Okay.

Please make sure that you have the custody of your products. We do not want to leave them here.

So. We. Are looking at.

I am not going to give you additional time for a sprint retrospective.

And rather, we will have a collective retrospective of how things went.

So I'm going to. Be.

These are the ones that I will take along and will sell. Okay, so here is what we have.

If you look at both the sprints. There are a lot of observations that we can make.

First of all, the percentage that led to the velocity and the highest velocity is important,

but also the difference between what you estimated and what you ended up with.

So that is important from so from the percentage perspective.

Team B and teams. He did well in sprint one. However, if you look at the overall velocity, then team did it well.

However, again, because there is a lot of difference here, so that is not a good sign.

Because every after every sprint,

if you are going to tell the product owner that we promise more and what we couldn't deliver and the same trend for TMD,

we observed it, observed it for sprint two as well.

So that means there is some problem that you need to work on.

So when you are working in in an eight member team and in subsequent sprints of what you are estimating, you are not able to complete it.

That means there is some problem you need to discuss with your team during the review retrospective, and try to figure out how to rectify that.

So I would start with team D. What do you think happened?

What I did not like. Yeah that's a good technical issue.

Anything else that you could have done better to to perform better.

The first. Time we came up with one design.

Okay. All of them? Yep.

That problem like complicated. Yeah. Mhm. Yep.

So did you. Did you follow the same design in the second sprint.

Okay. Mm. Okay.

And um how how did different roles in your team go.

Who was doing what. Brandon was a technical lead in the design of the plane iteration, and was the first one to show us how to build the plane.

How is this possible?

And Grace was the overall designer who came up with that logo and making sure the planes were clean and outward planning for them.

Okay, so who who actually ended up building the planes?

Or all of you who are like, okay.

Okay. Then. If we look at the story points for our team A.

A could get they could complete more story points in the second sprint.

However, the percentage what so difference between estimated and actual is still there?

Pretty much about him.

B? E. Did you miss?

Yeah. You missed three, right? Two.

Two. Two. Have I? I think you missed three.

And that was the problem with it. It might be a problem with.

With throwing. Right. Yes.

You directly tested in fraud and. Yeah. So that is another thing I would like to mention that I gave you.

Um. I told you that you are allowed to test anywhere in the room.

So you could have, you know, maybe there are, or assume that there was a circle and could have gone somewhere else.

So I was looking at the teams who were actually trying to throw from there their meeting rooms,

but no one tried to actually actually, you know, simulate the the actual environment, which was right in front of you.

So something that you could have done. So last year, I recall, we run the same activity and there were around ten teams there, 3 or 4 member teams.

And the. Are given similar, very similar rules.

There might be 1 or 2 different rules with similar rules. They were able to manufacture a lot more planes.

And the reason was that I took out the the requirement of spinning so from.

So so they were able to um, maybe, you know, because of that they were able to manufacture more planes,

but the size of their planes was smaller and somehow they they managed to hit the target a lot, a lot more than what we saw this year.

So you need to work on your aeroplane manufacturing skills.

Right.

So, uh, next, what I am going to do is, uh, one by one, I want you to tell you or sprint experiences or the experiences of going through this process.

What do you think you guys learned about Scrum and Agile and what could you have been done with her?

I think in the first sprint, it was good for us to explore a lot of different options so that in subsequent sprints we could optimise,

and I think that's what we did. Yeah. Hmm. Any other comments?

I think we search online and about which way actually you can describe it.

Yeah. Yeah. And we kind of just head up for a little angle for 5 to 10 degrees.

It would be better. Mm. So that is the skill of how to fly.

Yeah. And what about the. So these are the technical aspects that you're talking about.

What about the team organisation aspects?

What do you think? What kind of experiences you had with the team?

Maybe something that you could have done better. Did you?

For example, you realise that one of the team members is better at throwing the plane than the others.

After sprint one demo and then you switch the rules. Did you guys switch your roles a bit from 1 to 2?

We had one dedicated pro signal. Okay. Okay.

What about team B for the sprint one?

Like what we decided is she. She was a scrum master.

Like where she. We decided, like, what we can do. And we both were the developers, and we assigned beta as a QA.

But, um, like, later on, we realised due to the time crunch, we were not able to complete the three product.

So in the next sprint, what enhancement we did is like we all became the developer.

Like being a agile team. He was a QA as well as the dev for us as well as well as her.

So being a scrum master, she did the dev as well. Like once she had some idea we did help her and we did that part.

And the difference is like from the sprint one to sprint to,

the task got increased and the logo thing was being added and we have to make four or maybe more number of planes.

So it's more like on the first sprint, we learned how to execute and it helped us in the spring to like the execution part because we were able to,

you know, go ahead with this athletics as well because in sprint one we missed aesthetic part.

Yeah we covered up that one. But the miss was something like we didn't test it properly because.

So like later I realised that we can test it here.

Just playing around with that instead.

You could have tested so could be directly if I say ran to ran the product into prod environment and it didn't work as expected.

So like from my team, like I think we should have tested more.

But at the team we worked good for the sprint. We learned from the sprint.

Yeah, that's a very good observation about the team role switching as well.

As well as the importance of testing and production environment and stuff.

So it is so Self-organising your teams is is a key aspect of agile teams or scrum teams,

because that is generally believed to help the production and quality production.

So if something is not working with one of the team members, then you can switch the roles.

If one of the team members is not available, then also you can switch the roles.

Another aspect that. I would like to point out here is that at the start of sprint one,

I think at least two teams started with three members or two members, and then a third or fourth member joined.

So someone joined late, so you would have spent at least some time to talk to them and introduced them to what is going on.

So that will also happen during your actual sprints.

Someone is away for some time and comes back. You need to tell them that where we are in the in the development and then move on,

bring them in in, cooperate, get them started so that they can help as well.

What about teams E? So team C you forgot to put the logo.

So I assume that that is an indication of not all team members being attentive to the requirements.

And that is also very important that every individual of the team, scrum team has the responsibility of understanding all the requirements,

and it should not be a responsibility of just the scrum master, for example.

How, how, how was your experience?

And our experience is she is the grandmaster and she gives us some, you know, some growth to us who grow their playing,

who testified, who calls himself and Amy Martin, or maybe check and panel delivery.

And in the sprint you we we change the role and and change the observer and the driver.

So so yeah. Okay. We we we know some something about the.

well, something about, uh, operations. Um, we decided to change things, and I was trying to think inside a more stable.

You will achieve the requirement. And the main issue is as.

As you say, we didn't expand over the entire time.

Well, so that's what we need to do. Yep.

Yep. What about the different designs?

I noted that team B had mostly similar designs for all the all the planes, but and similar is for team D, team A and team C.

They experimented a bit with different designs.

How do you think that went and what was the reason for that primarily?

It's an optimisation. So I can see one reason that every developer was given this freedom to come up with their own design.

And now this.

This might indicate a little problem because it depends if if someone came with a design and and showed it to everyone else and everyone else,

this is a good design. But then there is another design that is also allowed to be carried on.

So that means you are maybe, maybe thinking too much about, you know, what different options we have.

You need to commit to one design or at most two, right?

So that you have that expertise in one design rather than being, you know, a jack of all, all the signs.

So that is something is important to note as well.

And what about which team is left or none?

Yep. In the. You have already mentioned that you guys.

Did you switch your roles on sprint 1 to 2?

We did it as Grace picked up additional responsibilities.

So during the planning phase we didn't touch the flavours.

So so far for us every time we changed the game.

Yeah, three minutes to building the plane. The extra hands. Yeah.

So this is a very important point. I would like to reflect upon this.

Now, ideally when you were you guys were planning during sprint planning, I should have put a restriction that you are not allowed to build.

Right. Um. I later recall that last year, what I did was I provided you additional pages so that you can test,

you know, and do your, uh, testing work on those papers.

And then you have these additional sheets for the main sprint.

So that's a product owner's problem. So I accept my mistake there.

Uh, which would mean which would have meant that you you could have built more planes and maybe higher quality planes, but we owned both sides.

Yeah. Yeah. So anyway, what you promised was five, and then you ended up with six.

So that is also a good percentage.

But then again, the quality could have been better. And one factor It was, as you mentioned, that you guys didn't.

You were too honest to wait until this friend.

Um. So that is pretty much all about the, the, this activity.

And I think you would have now, those of you who have already worked in software companies or on as a freelancer, you have built several products.

You know, the importance of understanding the requirements, spending time on making sure that there are no ambiguities or as less as possible,

asking questions from the client that, you know, to have that clarity and then move on to the next steps in.

And some of you would have already worked in the agile context as well.

So if you have already done that, that is also a help.

So you understand that it is very important that all the team members you have, you are going to have eight team members,

even if 1 or 2 team members do not understand how Scrum or Agile works or what is expected, that is going to create a problem.

Most probably that is going to create a big problem later in the at least later in the project.

So during your team meetings, make sure that everyone has understanding what is being talked about, right?

So that you do not have any fake or dummy members. Right?

And everyone is contributing right from the start. But at the same time, you need to understand what everyone is saying.

And if there are a lot of views coming in from everyone.

Then you you need. Need a consensus about the. About certain points.

Um, and this is where cooperation is going to play a major role because there is no leader.

Scrum master is just a facilitator. Uh, everyone is a leader and there is no leader.

So this is this is a kind of a situation. So you you need to.

And scrum master has this role that every everything is the process is going smoothly.

So it is their responsibility to keep looking, reviewing, tracking, monitoring stuff how things are going.

Any questions or comments from your side?

I think we have we have mostly talked about what is required at this stage.

So I hope this activity would have helped you in understanding how scrum works.

At least you would think that I have a slight understanding of scrum, and now I can get into a team and start working.

Right. So. So assignment two is going to be about your understanding of Agile and Scrum concepts.

Basically it is going to be a reflection a reflection report.

It is going to be a free form report.

Where you are going to demonstrate your understanding of agile values and principles as we learned in the last class.

If you have previously worked on a project which was not agile,

then you would be expected to think about or reflect about what would have happened if I would have applied these principles there.

If you already have some agile experience, you would be expected to write about that experience as well.

And of course, then there would be basic rules about how to write it.

In this report, you are allowed to use personal language, but still be professional.

Do not use slang and make sure that every sentence that you write is meaningful, so that you do not have to read more or unnecessarily.

So basically, the assignment is about developing a deeper understanding of these concepts that we have talked about,

and we kind of practice them using this activity today as well.

So the first thing that you report must have. So you can think about like I can write this in three paragraphs.

One paragraph can be about agile values and principles.

The second paragraph can be about these scrum framework in the context and constraints of a university course.

And then the third paragraph can be about your own experiences, about an independent project in which you worked,

or you would have wanted to work, how you would apply the agile concepts there.

Note that you do not need to wait for your actual project to be allocated.

You can start doing this assignment right away. I'll zoom a bit.

When you talk about scrum. You would be expected to love the different development practices that are involved in Kanban and Extreme programming,

or other similar practices related to agile.

800 to 900 words. Here is the marking rubric.

So content demonstrate an understanding of which values and principles and apply them correctly in the context of developing an application.

So what you need to do you may think about an application or you may pick one

from any previous projects like the previous year's list that I gave you.

And then you can think about applying some of the agile values and principles.

You are not expected to cover them all,

but I want to see some evidence of your discussion around how you would apply those values and principles to this context.

Then, thinking about a university context, for example, you might have worked on a university course project,

you need to pick it and apply scrum along with one of the other practices to that project.

So if you already worked using scrum in that project, that is helpful.

If you didn't, then think about how you would have applied it.

So this would like an example of this would be like, you know, previous I.

Didn't follow an agile approach because I didn't know about it.

The project mainly followed a linear approach where we started with talking to the client, collecting the requirements,

then analysing them, designing the solution, implementing it, testing it and deploying it.

But then. And think about how you can now.

Now when you know that what is scrum and what is agile and what are these values?

How can how you would have amended that process and its details.

So just give a couple of instances of how you could have done that.

Finally, reflection on previous development experiences and their outcomes.

Compare them meaningfully with how the outcome. So this is this.

This is the one I was talking about. And this is this is just about the university project.

So if you have done any other project you would be talking about that project here.

So it would be good if you separate them into three paragraphs so that it is easily visible.

We still will be making sure that whether you have these contents anywhere in your write up, but if it has more structure, it will help.

So your writing style is important. You can use personal language, but make sure that there are no mistakes and there are no thank.

You. Because this is a reflection you are not allowed to use.

ChatGPT write it in your own words, your own experiences and that is what is going to pay.

Because this is a reflective activity. You will learn only if you write on your own experiences.

Note that. If.

Your reflection is written in a non reflective language.

So you never talk about your experience and you just talk about how the [INAUDIBLE] is this?

In projects it is used like this. That is not going to be considered as a reflection.

So the way you write is very important. So although this is that you will be asked to redo this and when, no, you are going to be marked down.

So make sure when you write it you are writing in your personal language.

You are saying that I worked on this project and and then I would have made this change and so on.

So basically we have to include details for the project. Yeah, it is a very good Question.

If you introduce details, you include those details.

It would be better from the markers perspective,

because contextualising your experiences is is like providing more detail and that will help in marking.

So if you just say that so minimally, what you need to tell us about a previous project,

for example, that I worked on whether monitoring system and I worked on this part.

So this will be a minimal, you know,

experience that you are a minimum minimal detail that you have mentioned about the project project in my personal project as well,

or the it can be a personal project. So one project from the university context and one project that you have done Independently.

It can be from your previous job. It can be from your personal experience.

As an example, we can mention yes. If you do not have any of these, you can bring in an example.

One example we need to take from the assignment one topic.

No, no no that is not a requirement. Yeah. There is no such requirement.

But you can if you think if you do not have any previous experience, you have never worked on a project.

You can then go to the previous projects list I provided and pick one project.

And you you can write your reflection based on that.

Write. The rest of the stuff is about the academic integrity which you guys already know about, do you?

Do you have any questions? This is you.

Next. Right. So you have around, say 8 or 9 days.

And assignment one is due tomorrow. If you want to see the.

Note that from my previous experiences. These students would confuse the agile values and principles with with the implementation of scrum.

So let's say that we have mentioned about values and principles. So that is enough.

Now that has to be explained separately and scrum has to come separately.

And then when you are talking about your previous project then you can kind of bring in everything.

So just to clarify,

I need to start with my understanding of cultural values and then with University Context Project and then my own personal project.

Yeah. So the split of the paragraphs should rather focus on agile values and principles

really related to the development of an application as a first paragraph.

Then you can move on and have the second paragraph on Scrum and Kanban and other Practices.

With respect to a project or a practice that you have done in the university environment.

Now I leave it to you to know it will be better if we then go forward.

And the third paragraph would be about a previous experience where you would need to talk about the agile approach if if it was applied,

and in case if it was not applied then then you can talk about it as well, how it can be applied.

In a scenario. So so sorry. Sorry to interrupt you.

Basically this paragraph is going to focus on agile values and principles.

Second paragraph is going to focus on scrum and other practices.

And the third one is going to focus on your experience or your experience.

So in the third paragraph,

like the project that you have experience in would take centre stage and then you'll relate it to the to the agile approach.

You mentioned a university context example.

What does that if you have done a project as a part of one of the courses.

So basically we are supposed to give two examples.

One should be like a university context example, and one should be either personal or previous or something like that.

So you would need to bring in three examples three project examples.

So one is going to be this application. Another one is going to be this application.

So one thing I can allow you to do is combine these two applications.

Right? And then the third one that is having an experience with a previous project is is separate.

So in total we need three examples. Let's say one with agile principles and values.

One should be based on Kanban scrum. Yep. And thought should be both.

Yes a previous experience. So for example, when you talk about scrum here, because we are talking about university environment,

you would be talking about how these projects need to be scaled down and these processes, what limitations they face in these course projects.

So it will come down to that. But when you are talking about a previous experience.

If you worked in, say, industry, then those limitations won't be there.

Then you can, you know, tell that it was the scale was large and these practices could be easily implemented and so on.

So it is important that for agile values and principle, the first one,

the values and the principles that we talked about, you need to refer to at least 1 or 2 of them.

Clearly refer to them. So if you just say that this application, that developing this application followed agile values and principles, it.

So you need to go deeper and go to individual values and principles.

Because you will have one. You will have two classes before this deadline.

Date. Deadline, which is next Friday. So you will have chances to come back and talk to me or post your question on it.

Okay. We have multiple submissions to this one. You can submit any, any number of times.

Only the last submission will be. But I am not going to see your previous submissions.

I'm only going to keep the Project assignment tab open for days.

That works. I think it works.

It does have your work, but I don't see a reason to do that because it is just a text box.

You can keep writing somewhere else and once you are final, then then you can submit.

Okay. All right. Thank you for today's session. And I'll meet you next Monday.

We'll talk about other stuff. Okay.

Thank you. Did you get.

