[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
All right. Excuse me. Welcome, everyone.

Before we get started, we have Rainbow Club here.

It's wonderful. Hey, guys, I'm Tara, and this is Stephen, and we're from Rainbow Engineering.

Um, if you missed out on the Stein last night because you were doing pop,

or because the theme was football, and that's not as good as intergalactic disco.

Or if you went to the Stein and you want to go to another Stein, we're having our third annual Rainbow Stein with all of the rainbow clubs next week.

Uh, yeah. Hey, it's on Thursday. Um, in case that's important for you.

And we have hella drag queens this year. We have three in total. It's going to be delightful.

Uh, it's at Family Bar. That's $5 entry.

Yeah. That's all. Thank you. Oh.

Thank you. Hi, everyone.

Thanks for coming. So today we're going to put some examples around some of the things we've been talking about in quite an abstract way.

And I'm going to share with you a few examples of putting technical advice into government to try and shift policy.

So a few more stories from my time as Prime Minister's Chief Science advisor.

I'm going to use the word science because I was a science advisor,

but I'll say upfront that that's used in a completely inclusive way to include any kind of evidence set,

Any data definitely includes engineering, so you don't feel excluded.

The role is just defined as science as a catch all really broad term.

So we've had a look at mindset and grit. This week you've had your introduction to systems thinking.

And what this lecture should do is start to provide some information on the government context

that we've been talking about at national level issue that we're going to be addressing.

And it should also be helpful when you're thinking about your strategic case, when you hit your team projects and Systems Week projects.

So by the end of this session, importantly,

I'm not expecting you to understand or go into or regurgitate the details of the case studies that I'm going into.

They're there to give you some colour and to get you to think about the different types of Situation you might find yourself in.

If you're trying to input technical information into a wicked problem, so don't think it's all going to be in the quiz.

We're not going to put detailed content of these case studies.

What we will do is get you to think about what you can learn from the different case studies,

and how you might apply that to the assignments that you get.

And in particular, at the end, I'll introduce you to a tool called the Consensus Quadrant.

And the aim of this tool is to get you to pull apart what technical information can support and what it can't.

So in particular values a lot of decisions at the national level are informed by values way more than any technical insight.

And that plays out differently in different topics, which is a theme across the case studies that I'll talk about today.

So I'll give you a very quick overview of how technical insight might influence government decision making.

We'll go into a lot more detail about the machinery of government and the mechanics of that process in a later lecture.

So this is just a taster, and we'll look at both business as usual examples and also how that information input might change in a crisis.

So governments have two modes business as usual where everything is slow and careful.

And there's lots of accountability, lots of cross checks, lots of committees.

And things move quite slowly. But if there's a state of emergency, everything moves much faster.

The upside of that is you can respond quickly to a crisis situation.

And the downside of that is that the checks and balances are relaxed.

So if the crisis lasts too long, a government can change things faster and perhaps more inappropriately than you might like.

So the three real life examples I'll give you are a project on rethinking plastics.

What happened during the Faculty White Island eruption and the immediate aftermath,

which was obviously an emergency context, and finally less of a less of a threat.

More of an opportunity. I'll talk you through a project we did on artificial intelligence and healthcare.

And then in the last ten minutes or so, I'll reflect on those three examples in the context of the consensus quadrant to see

if that's a useful tool for you to separate your values from your technical insight.

And so I don't forget all this information's online. But if you happen to be interested in what the written reports look like,

I still have lots of spare ones in my office and I'm decluttering, so come and grab one at the end.

If you're interested in AI or plastics. So just to emphasise, when I was the Prime Minister's Chief Science advisor, that's not a political role.

So the chief science adviser is there to provide independent advice to the Prime minister right across science.

And it doesn't matter who the Prime Minister is.

So I served under three prime ministers, Jacinda Ardern and the two crises.

They all had very different styles, but they all commissioned evidence to inform policy.

Jacinda is a detailed person. She liked the detailed level reports. Some of them were big thesis length.

Um. Chris Luxon prefers headline messages with all the key points in a short format and absolute assurance that his advisors have checked the details.

And Chris Hipkins is somewhere in between.

So there's, um, there's a lot to learn when you change bosses on how to communicate the same information in different ways.

So what we did for all our reports was a short version and a long version and a flyer,

sometimes a video, all these different formats to try and get the insights into the project.

And you might think about that when you're doing your reports. So which which people in the hierarchy might look at different sections of your report?

There might be an executive summary that might make it all the way to the minister. And the details underneath might get scrutinised by officials.

And you need to keep both those audiences in mind when you are putting your recommendations and your options to government.

There is the were there still are not quite so many now of the chief science advisers in Wellington.

So this is just the list of all the different ministries that, while I was the Prime Minister's chief science adviser,

who employed their own independent chief science adviser, so I could always phone a friend.

So obviously I don't understand all of science, engineering,

but along a Maori social science, ecology, you name it in enough detail to advise anybody.

So my job was to find the experts on any topic of interest, distil information, and help it get to the right desk in government.

And this set of people were my go to.

So they were the first people I contacted, and it was a network of networks, so we could very quickly access the information we needed.

And I'll give you a particular example of that around the White Island eruption and anyone who pays attention to what's going on.

This guy here, the chief science advisor for the Ministry of Primary Industries, anyone knows name bring a chocolate fish on Monday.

Tuesday, if anyone knows his name. No low profile role.

Now that's John Roche. So he's now they're seconded from that role to be the current Prime minister's chief science advisor.

So just a few high level points that are important context for appreciating the case studies.

First of all, no matter how smart it might be, how comprehensive it might look.

Science is never the only advice. Lots of things are decided by values, by politics, by, um, vibes, by judgement calls.

Science can be an input, but is never the only advice.

I think the time that science advice in recent years has had the highest profile was during Covid 19,

and certainly at the beginning of the pandemic, it felt like globally, science had this huge role to play because nobody understood the virus.

We had to sequence it. We had to design a vaccine. We had to understand how it spread.

There was so much to do. So governments globally tuned in to science advice.

That's unusual.

Most decisions don't need that much science advice, and it's really important to understand what the technical input can contribute and when.

That said, science and engineering are very good at defining problems.

So in any government working group or if you're working for a management consultancy and you're advising local government or a ministry.

Understand that your technical training makes you very good at defining problems, irrespective actually of the problem.

So you've got that basic rigorous training that helps you do that.

Also very good at identifying options and maybe coming up with options that intuitive thinkers might not hone in on.

So the outside the box options that, oh, we haven't tested this permutation of variables options.

So technical input around decision making tables is super useful for that.

But there are things that science struggles with. One is quick answers.

And politicians have to make decisions on defined and sometimes very short time frames.

So the window to input technical advice is often very compressed.

And in that sense your teams and systems work assessments mirror reality in some cases,

because sometimes there just isn't enough time to get the complete, rigorous answer that you need.

You have to get your best answer and explain what you know, and importantly,

what you don't know and how long it might be before the uncertainty narrows to the decision maker in a timely way.

So you've got your technical people on one side. You've got your elected officials, your politicians on the other side making the decisions.

And the people in the middle are policymakers. So they are hopefully listening to the evidence and using it to inform their advice.

But they are absolutely working on the time frame of government and beholden to their ministers.

And they need to bridge that divide between the level of rigour that you might want to provide and

technical advice and the expediency of getting it on the decision makers table for the decision.

And we'll come back to this at the end. But remember that presenting the facts rarely changed anyone's mind.

We are all guilty of confirmation bias. We all read and subconsciously filter the information to confirm our own biases.

So if I read a report saying that chocolate is good for me,

I am not going to apply nearly so much scrutiny to that report as one that says that celery is good for me, whether I like it or not.

And sadly, the more trained you are and the more experienced you are in reading studies,

its more likely that you you hone your confirmation bias so that you're actually really good at dismissing the ones you don't like,

compared to people who've had less technical training.

So always be aware when you're putting options together that just plain facts probably aren't going to cut it.

You also need the context to understand people's values and to make sure that you have disconnected.

And again, we'll come back to this at the end. The science debate from the values debate.

So the example I often give is imagine you want to save a forest.

Imagine that you have spent your whole life next to that forest. You love that forest.

You want to understand that forest and say you do a degree in ecology, and you really have a lot of technical know.

How about how to save that forest?

And a proposal comes up in government to actually, we're going to get rid of that forest and we're going to dig for gold there.

Maybe it's at the top of the Coromandel and it's time to reopen the gold mine, be great for the economy, create lots of jobs.

There's a values debate there about what you value more, the forest or the gold mine.

Technically, you know a lot about the forest and very little about the gold mine.

And it's really, really hard not to try and argue your science debate through a values lens.

But science can tell you what might happen if the forest goes, how to preserve the forest,

maybe how to do the mining and put back before us with the least damage.

But it can never tell you whether to save the forest. That's a value judgement.

And so when you get into these tricky problems, be aware of your own values.

Position what the technical insight tells you and how to separate those two in your report.

They're both important, but they're very separate things.

So the sorts of advice that we got asked to give and that you might be asked to give in your assessments can be different formats.

So there's proactive strategic reports that are commissioned by ministries or local government, in my case by the prime minister.

Um, on big, detailed topics that needs a bunch of experts to sit down for a year and come up with some recommendations.

So we did one on plastics, and I'll mention we did commercial fisheries, which will come up later.

We did one on antimicrobial resistance. We did a lot on food waste.

And I'll talk today a little bit about the opportunity that artificial intelligence presents for healthcare.

So there were major rigorous reports. We got together expert panels that I'll describe, and they came out with detailed recommendations.

There are also some public facing explainers that we were asked to produce, so people worry about the safety of 5G.

We put out a website aimed at local governments,

reassuring their constituents or interested members of the public to try and address some of those fears and put them in a context.

We were asked to put together a bundle of evidence for the public ahead of the cannabis referendum.

That was fascinating, and also to advise on fluoride and nitrite in our water.

If you're interested in any of those, the website link is there, and I've put direct links on canvas to some of the more relevant ones.

And while we won't test you on the details of any of that,

it might be useful for you to read and get get the kind of feel of how you take a big problem,

how you scale and scope it, and how you turn it into recommendations, because that's what you'll be asked to do.

And finally, in an emergency, you have reactive advice A very fast changing situation, and there might be advice that's needed in a hurry.

And I'll give particular details on Picardy White Island. So first of all, plastics.

Everybody understands that there's a problem with plastic. We produced a report called Rethinking Plastics in New Zealand and it was a dream project.

It was pre-COVID. We had a government that included the Green Party, including the minister responsible for waste, Eugenie Sage,

who was very passionate about doing this and really helped make sure that the recommendations got implemented.

We had a Prime Minister who was getting lots of letters, especially from children,

saying, we really want to get rid of plastic off our beaches, out of our countryside.

And we had a following wind in terms of public opinion.

So there was a Cornwall Brunton poll just before Covid that said that the number one social

and environmental issue on people's minds at that time was plastic and what to do with it.

Probably not the most important issue, and the intervening few years has really illustrated that there are bigger issues than that,

probably, but it was one where there was a lot of public support, and so it was quite easy to put together an expert panel to have a huge reference

group helping us write the report and really try and tackle this problem.

That said, it really is a wicked problem. So we have made tons and tons and tons of plastic since it was first invented.

And when we were doing the report, I think it was 8.3 billion tonnes.

It will have only gone up since then. We invented this material in around the 1950s.

One of the things we liked about it was that it was so hard to destroy and so stable, and then we wondered why it wouldn't go away.

And what's happened is it's just broken down and broken down and broken down and slowly contaminated the environment.

And now it's everywhere. So we have created we being mankind, womankind, an entirely man made problem.

And we need to come up with some ways to solve it. That's probably not solvable.

That's why it's wicked. Just because microplastics are everywhere in everything.

But we can start to mitigate it and ameliorate it and stop it getting worse if we clean up the environment,

if we understand which plastics are more harmful than others, if we stop creating more waste,

and if we find better ways to recycle the plastic that we've already made the challenge and this kind of systems diagram,

it's not really even a systems diagram, but it's an attempt to map out the scale of the problem.

Of course, it's not just New Zealand, it's also offshore. There is a lot of product and packaging manufactured in New Zealand,

and we have numbers on that, but there's an awful lot of numbers that we don't have.

So we know how much we export. We know how much we collect as waste.

We know how much waste is recovered. We're very confident.

The green arrows on how much recovered material is used and recycled.

But we really know nothing at all about how much is lost to the environment.

We're pretty hazy on how much goes to landfill.

We're very hazy on how much leach is out of landfill, and we also collect a lot of waste that we can't recycle, that we ship offshore.

That is not handled in the most appropriate way when it gets there.

So in any project like this, including the ones that you will get, you will want to solve the problem with lots of nice round numbers and clean data.

There will not be clean data, so understanding the level of confidence in your data and what that means is that uncertainty maps through.

Your options, and recommendations are really important. That said, we came up with a report that most people could agree on.

We had this tagline make best practice, standard practice because lots of the things we were recommending weren't new.

They weren't new technical insights. They were just good practice, good projects, good tech that could be adopted more widely and scaled.

You can have a look online at all the detailed reports, detailed recommendations.

There were very detailed in the full report, but they fitted under six themes.

One was to have a plan to really get all the actions organised and to find ways to measure and monitor as we make progress,

to get government to lead the way. So it's really hard now to find plastic cutlery, small shampoo bottles.

Um, if you go into any school, hospital, government building, you'll find everything's as sustainable as possible.

Whereas if you go to another country where they haven't made these changes, you'll find a lot of plastics still there.

We advocated for consistent design and use and disposal of products.

That's happening slowly, but the fewer product types there are,

the more likely it is that you can get efficient recycling to innovate and amplify the research and technology that was already making a difference,

and to tackle the environmental health impacts.

And the last set of recommendations is probably the most important for monitoring whether any of these recommendations make a difference.

And that's collecting data.

And I think you'll find that in every report we did in six years, collecting data was a major challenge and a highlighted recommendation.

Very hard to get funding to collect data because governments want to announce shiny new policies that make a difference now.

And collecting data is resource intensive and hard to get the public behind.

So if you heard the Prime Minister on the TV saying, we've put in $20 million for data collection,

I don't think there would be a big cheer amongst New Zealand and the media.

And yet that might be the single best investment to test all these other policies

and better invest in new policies going forward that do actually make a difference.

So we had a launch. We had lots of work from policy officials in parallel to our recommendations.

That meant that they advised at the time we delivered our report that the recommendations should be accepted.

The cabinet approved them. And there's something called the speech from the throne when Parliament opens for its new term.

That's Dame Patsy Reddy, who is the governor general at the time.

And she gave us a shout out and said one of the things the government was going to do was implement all our recommendations.

So we were pretty excited about that Because all the ducks were lined up.

The policy people, the political people, the scientific people were all in agreement at the launch of the report.

There were lots of announcer balls. There was lots of stuff on the TV.

There were lots of corny headlines saying drastic plastic ban, and we had a bit of momentum to make those changes.

At that point, the technical adviser steps away. Away. It's up to the politicians and the policy people to to get on with it.

But it was nice to see it all happen. So even in the pandemic, 12th of August 2020, the government carried on moving these forwards.

Very, very nitty gritty details required to get rid of hard to recycle PVC,

but only when you've found replacement products for all the things you use PVC for.

Same with expanded polystyrene packaging. If you think back ten years ago you could buy burgers in those polystyrene clamshells.

Now you can't throw on those cardboard ones.

That took a while to come through because they had to find products that actually worked that burger suppliers didn't mind using,

and get rid of all the ones that they'd already bought.

So for every item, somebody had to sit down and work through the ramifications of the ban and make sure it could all be implemented smoothly.

And the good thing about this project is that it survived the election. So even in 2024, the transformation of waste plan was still in play.

And for example, we recommended only using plastics one, two and five.

And that went through with the new coalition government.

So some of our reports got stuck when the government changed. This one didn't.

So this was one that had political consensus and continues to make a difference, albeit at a slower pace as we went through the Prime Minister's.

So I'll switch now to emergencies. I was the chief science adviser at a very unusual time.

We had three major crises and I was called in.

Me and my team and the experts we could find for all three.

So first of all, the tragic events of the mosque shooting in Christchurch,

where there was a call for advice on how to support the Christchurch community and the impacted communities,

in particular, recover in a way that was culturally appropriate.

Um, so that was a very sad time, but we were able to make a difference on a on a short time frame to inform what became the Christchurch Call

when Jacinda went off to meet Emmanuel Macron to try and do something about the online aspect of terrorism.

I'm not going to talk about Covid 19 because everyone gets rather triggered by at the moment, but that was a long,

slow crisis that took up a huge amount of all my waking hours and my team's waking hours,

and all the experts in New Zealand as we scrambled to meet the demands for information from government.

And in between those was the eruption of Bacardi White Island.

Which, for those who don't know, was an absolutely tragic event where a tour party was on the volcano when it erupted.

Tragically, there were many deaths, and by the time the dust had settled and the rescuers had gone in to take off the living,

the challenge that remained for government was to work out whether to retrieve the bodies.

Um, so that was a pretty gruelling circumstance to be in.

I was working with Jill Jolly, who was, um, on our chief Science Advisor forum,

with expertise in volcanology and other experts and what we had to do despite

the fact we were as moved as anyone else about the immediate human tragedy,

was focusing only on the immediate technical question which is written there.

So the technical question we were asked to answer is what is the probability of a second eruption at any given time?

Because the government needed to decide whether to go and retrieve the bodies, and if so, when.

And this is a really good example of a values driven decision that needed technical support.

So each one of you in this room will have a really strong feeling about whether it's worth risking a human life to retrieve a body,

and that will depend on your upbringing, your religion, what what things you read, what drives you as an individual.

It's really got nothing to do with science. And that was not a scientific technical decision.

What was a scientific technical decision was figuring out the probability of a second eruption.

And it turned out that was 6% with a huge error margin, highly, highly uncertain.

And it turns out that with the probability of death of 6% per hour, special forces were within their mandate.

Their motto is go into danger, to be deployed to retrieve the bodies, and that left it as a political decision,

a cabinet decision to decide whether or not to go in and retrieve the bodies.

And ultimately they did. And thank goodness there wasn't a second eruption and everybody came back safe.

So I'll just give you a little insight into how the technical side of that played out behind the scenes.

So this is an actual paper that was given to me by Jill.

The day the mountain erupted.

And you'll see it's a scientific paper with a quite dull technical title, Evaluating Life Safety Risk for fieldwork on Active volcanoes.

And they had developed some years before the eruption.

This thing called vol rest, which was a life risk estimator. And it's used by in that at that time it was an organisation called GNS science.

Nuclear science,

to decide whether they could deploy their scientists to go and make measurements on faculty and other mountains to understand the risk of eruption.

It was not designed for emergencies,

and it's acknowledged in the paper that you're going to have a very different risk appetite in different situations.

So if you're a scientist wanting to go and check the solar panels working, you're not going to go the day after an eruption.

You're going to wait till the mountain is really quiet. If there had been a school bus full of children still alive on the island.

I don't think anyone would have asked for this probability. I think the value judgement would have been go and get those children.

And we were in this middle zone where there was a values judgement that needed to be made, which depended in some ways on the risk.

Now, giving this paper to cabinet with the very useful but hard to understand figure seven,

which was the hourly risk of dying at different distances from the crater, was not helpful.

So what we needed to do was take this very technical paper, understand where the bodies were.

Understand the probabilities. Get all the expert advice and turn it into something that was very quickly intelligible by cabinet non-experts,

and also the general public, who wanted to know what was going on.

This is just a page from my notebook, because I was called into all the emergency meetings and being a long way from my home discipline,

I took Graham Leonard Hussain a minute with me, who's an expert on Picardy, White Island, and I was there as the chief science adviser.

I had a seat at the table and he was behind me supporting,

and I was literally passing notes back and he was messaging out to people he knew who knew the answers.

So this was when we were coming up with a map.

We did it in a few hours, and then Graham then presented it to the press, and I presented it to the people in forming cabinet and to the PM.

So this is Graham explaining the map to Sarah Stewart Black, who was the emergency controller for the Ministry of Civil Defence and Emergency.

And this guy here, Nicco Fournier, is another expert on fakery.

And he got positioned on a helicopter above fakery during the rescue operation so that

if there was a change visually in the volcano that he could perceive as an expert,

or if the data about the tremor and the gases that he was receiving in real time changed,

he could say, we should get those people off the mountain, because I think the situation has changed.

There's a very dynamic situation that was changing all the time,

and behind all those people was something called the New Zealand Volcano Science Advisory Panel,

which includes a whole bunch of volcano experts from all institutions across New Zealand.

They had this fantastic resource, which was a slack channel where they all shared their thoughts and they challenged the people in the

decision making room to make sure that we didn't have groupthink with that little tiny group of people,

and they agreed on consistent messages. So there was what we agreed on, what was still under debate, what the uncertainty was and when it might close,

and only the stuff that everyone pretty much agreed on went out to the media.

So Graham was in the beehive with me in the bunker, which is the emergency spot down at the bottom.

And this guy here, Tom Wilson, was at that time a university professor at Canterbury, still is partly.

And he did a lot of the media work based on that consistent information from the back room channel.

So it was a very good way of having a robust scientific debate and still getting the comms out.

And the maps that we had created got used quite widely in the press.

You will meet Tom later in the course because he is our guest lecturer,

and will give you some insight in his new role as the chief science adviser to the National Emergency Management Agency.

So he's full of stories about how you get technical advice into major events like floods, earthquakes.

Some of you might have heard about the big earthquake down south. I was actually in Dunedin and felt it.

It was near Milford Sound, and it was Tom's job to get up late at night and say, right, is there a tsunami risk?

Do we need to evacuate the people who live in the sounds? And the last example I'll give you is less of a dark story and more of an opportunity.

I've called it a wicked opportunity. I don't think people generally use that term,

but I like it because this is an exciting area where you can see how deploying

technology could make so much difference to the quality of healthcare in New Zealand.

And yet its implementation is really complicated.

And so deploying all these new tools that technical people, scientists,

engineers have come up with is really hard to make a difference where it matters most.

So this was not an emergency. Obviously, this was a report originally commissioned by Chris Hipkins delivered in draft to Chris Hipkins,

but delivered finally to Chris Luxon, which just illustrates that the science advice is not political.

It crosses that political divide and because we were straddling an election, we included two key people on the panel.

That's Ian Town, the chief science adviser to the Ministry of Health.

So beyond my term as the chief science adviser, he could support those recommendations within the ministry.

And this person here, you'll meet later, Robyn Whittaker.

She is currently chairing the group that's implementing lots of change using AI in Public Health New Zealand, Te Fatou Ora.

And so she was on our panel, heard everything on the panel from the experts.

The rest of the panel was a wonderful mixture of experts like Michael Wittrock, who's here in Auckland.

Philosophers like James McLaren,

who is here because we were thinking about how to think and how to interact with something that thought differently to us,

and we really needed someone who understood thinking. Philosophers are hugely important in deployment of AI.

And then a bunch of AI, um, tech people, healthcare people,

and just generally great thinkers and people that brought a Maori and Pacific perspective so that

we understood the different context in which we would need to deploy any innovations nationwide.

So I'll quickly skim through this. You can grab the report or look online if you'd like more detail.

The thing that inspired the report was politicians and PM Hipkins in particular,

really seeing that using AI presented huge opportunities to do healthcare better and more efficiently in New Zealand.

So Valpo Health is a New Zealand founded company that does Amazing image analysis of mammograms.

Now, because the company grew in a research ecosystem that favoured, um, finding large markets.

Their tech has been deployed in Australia and in the US, but hardly at all in New Zealand.

Even though they want it to be used at home, even though they're offered a discount to do so just to do it at cost.

So what it does is make mammograms more effective.

It gives more information to the radiologist, and it makes it easier to hone in on high risk patients to do extra treatments.

If you are in New Zealand and you are in the elite group that has private healthcare and you go for a mammogram,

Vol power tech is probably used if you are in public health,

certainly at the time of writing the report, and I haven't heard that it's changed, it won't be used.

And yet people say that AI could be used to solve inequities, but in this case, it's doing the exact opposite.

It's giving more information to the people that can afford it, and widening the gap to the people in the public health system.

So one of the things that we grappled with as we made recommendations was how to get innovations not just into the private sector,

but also into the public sector. Acknowledging that companies couldn't scale in New Zealand and needed to go off and find markets offshore.

But how could we also have the benefits domestically when taxpayers had funded that tech?

There's lots of case studies in the report. This one's local.

So this one came out of the Auckland Bioengineering Institute, which many of you will know.

It's a company called formas. Um, long story short,

they had seen that there was a need with people doing operations like hip joint replacements

to get better information to the surgeon ahead of slicing into somebody's leg.

So the old fashioned way of doing it was very much reliant on the judgement of the surgeon who would look at the X-rays.

They would look at the MRIs, but they didn't really know the size and shape of the piece that they might be inserting into

someone's leg or the hip joint that they were replacing until they actually opened the person up.

And then they had a variety of options that they could draw on to use the tech.

That form is used, used AI and advanced image scanning to take all the information before the patient was cut open,

make a 3D model of whatever was going on and enable the surgeon to create bespoke pieces ready for when the patient was on the table.

Again, something that you can pilot with a small number of surgeons with permission from the patients,

but something that's very hard to roll out across the board quickly.

So there were all sorts of considerations for our national context.

We needed to know how to evaluate these tools.

It's all very good looking at sexy case studies, but if you're going to deploy AI, it's going to make mistakes.

Importantly, you might check whether the tool is working, and then it might keep improving itself and make mistakes after you've evaluated it.

So how do you keep on top of a tool that's constantly evolving?

Um, I've used this image deliberately to show you the sort of mistakes AI can make because it thanks to remarkable behind the Sky tower.

Um, we don't want that happening in a healthcare context.

How can we make sure that we keep the public on board with this and get them to understand that this is helping,

that there are things that AI is really good at, that people are bad at, and vice versa.

For example,

there are lots of studies showing that an AI and a person looking at a radiology scan gives you a better result than two AI's or two people,

because we make different types of mistakes.

How does Health New Zealand support clinicians to understand the tools to trust the tools to know where, not to trust the tools.

How do we educate people? How do we get their input as we go?

How do we train? How do we address this really tricky issue of equity and not just roll it out for the people with private health care?

And have we adequately addressed our obligations under totality?

So we ended up again with detailed recommendations in eight themes.

We needed to understand the whole landscape of Aotearoa New Zealand, not just the private healthcare and the big cities,

but the remote, the remote sites, the primary healthcare, the hospital context, the consultants, everybody.

We needed to make sure that while things were more efficient, the doctors and the nurses were enabled to be more human, to do the human part well.

So, for instance, if you've got AI as it is now taking lots of the notes,

you are more available for caring and eye contact and things that people might like when they're sick.

Um, that's a big challenge in a cash strapped system, which is trying to get more efficient.

So we really emphasised that we wanted to enable adoption right across the the country to enable confidence, trust.

And I already talked about the inequity. Data and systems is really important.

AI is only as good as the data it gets fed. And if the data is a shambles, then the information coming out will be a shambles too.

You guys know that. And if you start digging into the quality of data across New Zealand,

it's probably not even so, you're going to get different results in different places.

How do you solve that at a policy level? In a political level? So we put up not just recommendations but considerations for implementation.

And some of these things are going through. Do we understand our contextual enablers and barriers.

In other words, in rural locations are the things we need in city locations that are extra things we need?

How do we really connect our tech communities that want to help with the people that are actually helping in the places where the need is greatest,

and how do we keep monitoring this tech as it keeps evolving after we've rolled it out?

So these are three punch lines I guess, from the report. So we said, look, there are huge benefits here that you can only realise if you deploy AI.

Well it's going to keep coming. So there were a lot of current applications when we did the report maybe three years ago, more and more since.

And how are we also going to move beyond clinical settings and make sure that AI is supporting health researchers in a way that has ultimate impact?

And to do that, and to help Robin in her task as chair of the National Artificial Intelligence and Algorithm Expert Advisory Group.

What a mouthful.

And we suggested some principles that, as all these very detailed recommendations and later ones from other technical groups were being implemented.

We make sure that all those principles were respected.

So I think that was useful work to guide the subsequent work that went on.

But because the government changed the mood changed, the implementation mode changed.

There wasn't a big fancy launch for this one. It's just quietly happening behind the scenes.

So I have given you three examples where I think science of advice made a difference.

Fair to say that didn't always happen.

So science advice, any sort of technical advice can be used well, it can be misused or it can be completely ignored.

Um, the worst report we did in terms of its landing publicly was one on gangs.

So this was commissioned by Jacinda Ardern. She wanted to understand how to minimise harm in and around gangs.

By the time we delivered the report,

we had PM Hipkins as prime minister and the election year meant that the Labour Party's position on crime had changed quite a lot,

and so a supportive, harm based report was not necessarily useful for their new policies.

So the government of the day backed away from it. And in my biggest media fail, this was Chris Luxon when he was leader of the opposition.

He was about to be my boss. So I went on the radio to talk about the report he was on.

Immediately afterwards, they did that gotcha thing where they played a soundbite from me talking about the report to the leader of the opposition,

and he said, I dismissed that completely. I disagree, um, we hadn't briefed him on the report yet.

So that's how the media works. So sometimes you do a lot of work.

You write a big fat report, you've pulled in all these experts and it just lands badly.

And so one of the things that I've thought about since I stopped being the chief science adviser was how

you might think about different topics before you end up on national radio with someone rejecting you and.

Figure out how to get the messaging right.

The framing of the project right. In order to understand how to get the message across and not trigger a whole pile of backlash and misinformation.

So this tool might be useful when you get your big reveal projects for teams and systems,

and it just tries to look at situations where the scientific consensus is high or low versus the values consensus being high or low.

And it draws on some work by others that I've referenced at the bottom. So if you've got a big weather event like a tornado,

everyone pretty much agrees it's coming roughly where it's coming, how strong it will be and when it will arrive.

Everyone also pretty much agrees that it's a good idea to get out of the way to lock up your children, to tie down your trampoline.

We know what to do, and so science advice is really welcome.

Then you can be as detailed as you like. A contentious issue like abortion.

again, each one of you will have a strong feeling on when abortion should be allowed.

If it should be allowed. It's probably got absolutely nothing to do with the technical details of the procedure.

So there's a huge scientific consensus about safety when and how it can be done safely.

But that's not going to sway the decision.

So really, scientists can put down their clipboards and allow that values debate to play out because it's a values debate.

There's some really murky areas, like recreational drug use, where there isn't really much data because nobody kind of admits it,

and nobody wants to do experiments on people who are doing something illegal.

We don't really know how good or bad lots of drugs are for you, and there's a massive polarisation in values.

So people who are libertarian think you should be able to do whatever you like with your own body, whereas people who,

um, have a strong objection to drugs have some moral panic, and probably overestimate the risk of recreational drugs.

So then you're in really dangerous ground, and that's where you're at risk of having your scientific debate playing out through your values lens.

So you're better, like we did in the gang's report, to try and move the conversation forward rather than make specific recommendations.

We had a play in that space in the cannabis referendum. If you're interested in how we did that.

And finally, there will be situations where everyone agrees we should do something.

So asteroid is about to hit the Earth. We're all going to agree we should probably do something about that,

but nobody's going to have the slightest idea what to do, although there are people working on it.

I'm just glad that I'm not the science adviser when that happened.

So if you put all the topics on a quadrant and if you've got a topic, you can go, hmm, what's the values consensus?

What's the scientific consensus? Does this help me frame my project? Does this help me move the conversation forward?

And what I've done is mapped all the projects that we did when I was a science advisor onto

that quadrant and tried to figure out why some are were much more successful than others,

so the plastics and the emergencies tended to come here, whereas gangs was harder to land.

And the hardest one of all, I'll tell you about later in the course, which was commercial fishing.

Of course, it can change with time. So Covid in 2020 was kind of an asteroid territory.

Everybody was like, what does this need to know everything about it?

What can we do? Please give us advice. And ironically, as we learnt more in the scientific consensus consolidated,

we lost the values consensus and we probably could have done a much better job at communicating that as we lost our social licence over time.

And for new technologies, you find that people haven't really decided yet.

So for AI project, they've put that right in the middle. You've got some people who are super excited about it.

You've got some people who are a bit wary of it. You've got quite a divergence in opinion and how useful it's going to be and how fast.

And really people haven't formed camps yet.

So for emerging technologies, you've got a little window of opportunity to try and influence the public and figure out what it is.

You might need to tell them to get them on the journey, or to hear their concerns,

and make sure that the technology journey is mindful of what the public are saying.

So that's the end. Happy to take some questions very quickly. Otherwise, we'll see you next week.

And Mark will be here to talk you through the nuts and bolts of business cases,

GDP analysis and all the things you'll need to actually get your projects done.

Thank you. Don't forget to take these reports.

