[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Hello, everyone. Can I have your attention, please? My name is Shaheen.

I am a PhD student of engineering department and I'm doing a research about

engineering students motivation and persistence with a focus on of gender equity.

And we are we're hoping the findings could help to inform strategies to better support

women engineering and also help with women's under-representation in engineering.

Now we are piloting a question now that I really appreciate it.

If you could scan the QR code and complete this survey, regardless of your gender, that your voice,

your participation is valuable for us to continue the research and support the gender equity.

And we also provide a few $100 vouchers as a thank gift and completed and got a chance to win it.

Thank you so much for your assistance, and if you have any questions you can ask me, I'm still in the lecture room before it starts.

Thank you so much. You're welcome.

Welcome, guys. So today we are going to be looking at the machinery of government because lots of the recommendations and suggestions that you

make in your team project and your systems project are going to need at some point to influence government decision making.

And a lot of people think of the government as just a black box.

People like to get grumpy about the government. Some people like to support the government.

But unpicking the different parts of government is really important if you want to influence it.

So you can think of the government as a system. It's certainly a system of systems.

It's got lots of moving parts. It's hard to influence.

There's lots of inputs, lots of outputs, and the connection between the two isn't necessarily clear.

So today I'm going to try and demystify some of that for you, which should be directly helpful for your projects.

And it'll also provide a backdrop to Thursday's lecture where we have our compulsory guest lecture.

And you're really lucky that the chief science adviser to the National Emergency Management Agency is coming in person,

and he's going to talk you through how everything I say today might change in an emergency and give you some examples of emergency,

where he's actually had to provide the technical advice to government in real time.

So the learning outcomes today are to make sure that you're really clear on the difference between central and local government,

and understand just the basics of how decisions are made in government,

because what we don't want is to find teams, projects that say governments should do this.

Government is the stakeholder because government is much, much more complex than that.

You can't just pull one lever mark government.

You have to know which part of which ministry is advising which minister to advocate and cabinet to make which decision,

and how those decisions might impact locally, and how local government might respond to them.

To do that, we'll have a quick look at the policy process,

which is the process that government departments use to provide advice to ministers on how and why you might change policy and after that,

after it's been through the political machine, implement any changes that are approved by cabinet.

It's quite complicated. Some people find it fascinating. Some people think they'd prefer it stayed as a black box.

Either way, it will help you to get through your assessment without puzzling over exactly who you should be advising.

What of when. And finally, we'll have a look at why change happens slowly, whether that's a good or a bad thing.

And that will give you a nice baseline for Thursday, where you'll be in an emergency setting and things need to happen quickly.

So we'll start with a quick look at Central Local. We'll answer the question, how are these decisions even made?

We'll outline the policy process, and then we'll touch on this divide between what happens politically and what happens in the policy landscape,

and how that might impact the pace of change.

So just to put it out there up front, New Zealand has, which most of you will know both local government and central government,

and many of the systems problems that we've been thinking about in this course cut across both.

So if you think about plastics, if you think about food security, both of those,

you need government at the central level to make some decisions, set some broad policy.

But then you need something to happen on the ground.

You need local government to enact those policies, to resource those policies, to do the recycling of the plastic, to resource the food banks,

to make sure that there's food security,

and there's often some tension between what's good for the whole country coming out of Wellington and what's good locally.

So it might be good for central government to say, we've slashed budgets, we're saving money.

It might be good for local government to say we're investing extra in local

amenities like libraries and parks and cinemas or looking after our environment.

And so you will hear if you follow the news.

Often conflict and tension between local government and central government and the interface of those two systems,

that's what you might call a boundary condition,

is one that you have to navigate really carefully with good relationships and find what's good for everybody.

So you'll hear people on the news say, what's good for Auckland is good for the country.

You might agree or disagree with that, but you might find some things that are definitely good for both Auckland in the country.

And it's likely then, that central government settings and local government settings might align.

Now, I've given you a link here to local councils in New Zealand.

It might be useful to look at it for your projects. It is the most confusing scramble, um, that I've ever looked at.

I think in terms of trying to get a big picture impression of how local government works in New Zealand,

you have regional councils, territorial authorities and unitary authorities.

It's all a muddle, and it's a muddle that's in the middle of changing,

because you might have heard that central government is pulling a lever saying, we want to simplify this.

It's too complicated. Please don't worry about the details of those.

I'm just giving you that link so that you're aware that there are lots of different local government structures.

One size doesn't fit all. And while it might look a bit of a mess, it's important that local government fits its locality.

So what you need as a governance structure for a massive city like Auckland is very different to what you might need in Kaipara or Nelson.

And so what's happened is local government structures have evolved to suit their local environment, to serve their local people.

And nationally, you look at it and go, oh my goodness, this is so complicated. Which is why central government is trying to simplify it.

And again, local governments pushing back on that because they think they should decide how they organise themselves.

So don't worry about the details. Just be aware that there are many complex details.

And also be aware that in Auckland we have what's called a unitary authority with an elected mayor and the mayor chairs the council,

and the council is made up of 21 local boards.

So because Auckland is so huge, it's a super city because the parts of Auckland are so different.

So I live in the central city. That's an urban environment.

I spend a lot of time on Great Barrier Island. You could not get more different.

One size doesn't fit all. So there's a local board for central Auckland and different parts of it, and there's a local board for Great Barrier Island.

They advocate for really local issues feed back up to Auckland Council who makes that decision.

So just as a quick one minute summary, this is why Auckland Council think we have a council.

Why do we have a council Auckland Council is made up of people from different backgrounds

who work together to make decisions to maintain and develop our growing city.

We want Auckland to be enjoyed by all and future proofed, a place where everyone is valued.

Our environment is looked after and our communities are supported.

The council works together with the community to improve Auckland through bylaws and policies,

and makes decisions in response to the needs of Aucklanders. It also manages hundreds of air services and facilities such as emergency management,

planning and consents, pools, beaches and parks, public spaces, waste and water quality.

Auckland Council's role is to manage and protect our entire region the city, its suburbs, rural areas, streams and coasts.

The role of central government in Wellington is to make decisions and create laws for all of our terroir.

Find out more at Auckland Council. So you'll see there the mention of central government almost as an afterthought.

So that's from Auckland Council's perspective. The legislative framework they're working in.

But it's all on the ground stuff. And you'll see lots of the things I mentioned, including emergency management.

So in the Auckland floods a couple of years ago in January, you needed two responses.

You needed a national response to liberate resources and get back up for the people on the ground.

But you also needed a council response to get out there,

mobilise the fire service and things like that to start rescuing people and to keep comms with Wellington going.

And there was a lot of friction around that particular incident that you can look at online,

which might be, um, good background for Tom's lecture on Thursday.

Anyone know who this guy is? Yeah, yeah.

Brown. He's obviously got a lot of name recognition. So Wayne Brown is our mayor and he chairs our council in Auckland.

And I'm putting this up to give you a sense of the difference between elected officials and non-elected officials.

So Wayne Brown, you've probably seen as socials, he was elected with a handsome majority.

He's trying to get re-elected. He is there because people in Auckland vote him in.

Only a small number of people bother to vote. But the ones that do voted for Wayne, he would like to be re-elected.

Along with Wayne, 20 other councillors were elected.

Now they don't all come from a particular party. Some form kind of alliances.

Some are sponsored by National or Labour or Greens. Some of the national parties and a lot are independent.

Um, there's no kind of party political structure as such in local government.

So Wayne's job is to find a majority for the things he wants to get through council.

So it's perfectly possible. And it's happened often that a mayor disagrees with all the other counsellors and can't get anything done.

So to get things done in our democratic local governance system, you need to build those relationships and build consensus.

So that's our governing body. Like I said, we have 21 local boards.

That's a lot of people, 150 members. They are feeding in to the council who are making decisions that impact the regions.

Now all of this is supported by the machinery of local government policy, planning and service delivery.

So Auckland Council as an organisation, as opposed to a governing body, as a chief executive and a whole pile of staff,

they're based down the road just off Altair Square and they are there to provide support and advice.

So we might say, I want to build a swimming pool and your swimming pools just don't get built.

What happens is he tells his chief executive, can you give me some advice on building a swimming pool and the advice comes back.

This is where you could put it. This is how much it might cost. This is some surveys we've done to see if people would like it.

And in that case it went through. And we have a pool down by the waterfront, which is great, which was his personal initiative.

But to get it to happen, he needed advice from policy officials and council.

He needed the support of at least half of these guys, and he needed support from the local board for that part of Auckland,

and he needed to get the budget through and all those sorts of things.

If in local elections, Wayne gets booted out and someone else gets voted in, these people tend to stay the same.

So if the next mayor says, you know what, I want a swimming pool. We've got all that institutional knowledge already within the council.

These are not political appointments. They are there to serve the officials of the day.

And there's a subtlety here around council controlled organisations. These are not part of the council but are controlled by the council.

That structure is used in governance to keep something a little bit at arm's length.

That was the structure for Auckland Transport until very recently, and it's currently getting sucked into the council itself again.

More detail, more tension. You don't need to worry about it,

but you might find in your team project and your system project that you are

confused about this being an agency and this being a government department,

and wonder what the relationship is. And it's likely something like this.

So central government, as we've heard, makes laws for the whole country.

And just like the mayor and the people working in Auckland Council, there are two categories of people working in government.

So are the politicians that we elect, exemplified here by Jacinda.

And there are the public servants who we don't elect. Exemplified here by Ashley.

It must have been a bad day because they both look sad.

So lots of people saw Jacinda and Ashley during Covid as one unit called government, but they actually had very different roles.

So Jacinda was the voted in prime minister again.

We all get to vote every three years. More people care about central government, so more people vote.

So it's up to us who we get as prime minister. It's not really up to us who we get as public servants.

So these are the people that lead government departments. In the case of Ashley Bloomfield, it was the Ministry of Health,

and they provide independent advice to politicians and then do the work to implement the law and make changes.

And they play a big role in emergencies. So Ashley was the director general for Jacinda, but also for Chris Hipkins and also for Chris Luxon.

Just checking my timing. If the Prime Minister changes, the director general doesn't necessarily change.

So you might have director generals that serve for 20 years across many different governments.

And that means that we have institutional knowledge, we have independent advice,

and that the politics of the day doesn't completely control the policy.

That said, as new governments come in and as public servants retire,

you do find that governments of the day tend to appoint someone more aligned with their policy position.

So we're not completely immune to political interference in the public service.

But if you look at all the surveys around the world, we score very highly on the independence of our public service.

So when you're giving technical advice to influence policy,

you are genuinely generally aiming at public servants like Ashley, not at political appointments like Jacinda.

That's important when you think about how to frame your recommendations in your assignments.

You saw this slide in lecture three. I've just popped it back up to remind you.

So remember the science, the technical input. The engineering is never the only advice.

There's things it's helpful for and good at. There's things it's not helpful for and not good at.

And we have politicians elected who make decisions in defined timeframes.

And we have policymakers who need to really bridge that divide between the policy,

the politician in a hurry and the people providing evidence, doing it in a careful, considered way.

So here's our central government in New Zealand, and we all want to play cabinet bingo.

Do you recognise anyone? Who's that? Yep.

Good. This one? Yeah. See how far we can get around?

Yep. He's gone, but he's here. Yeah. Same to you. Well done. Yeah.

Oh, you're all very good. Yeah. Well, we got Matt Mitchell this year.

Didn't get it last year. Who's that? Yeah. Yeah.

She's gone too. This is a slightly old photo. Yeah.

Yes. Well done. We're going to get all the way around.

Yes. Also now gone.

Yep. Yep. Yep.

Yep. And that's the trick. That's the cabinet secretary.

Wow. We did the full house. Well done guys. So those are the elected MPs who have made it into cabinet as ministers.

So you have a cabinet? That's the ultimate decision maker. The ministers who make decisions on their individual portfolios and the parliament,

which clears things through the House, which we'll see in a minute. So these are elected.

And then just like in local government, we have all these departments that are not elected.

This is the public service. Marx talked about Treasury a little bit.

That's one of 41 departments.

Do not quote me on that number, because quite a few departments are in the middle of merging or shrinking or disappearing.

So that number tends to change, but it's got the same number of functions.

So there's a lot of different independent units, all there to advise the politicians on what the policy should be,

and then to take the decisions from the cabinet and implement those to make changes to the country.

It is a hugely complex system. As people outside of government tasked with giving advice,

you might like to know what the government is up to in terms of its priorities or its policy work programme.

It can be really hard to figure out what the policy agenda is.

And I think I talked in lecture three about being just ahead of the policy agenda was important.

Pretty hard when you're outside government to see. But you can get some clues.

So before parties get elected they make manifesto commitments.

So you will hear already if you listen to social and you're following any politics,

which it sounds like some of you must be, if you can name the whole cabinet and you'll hear people making promises.

If elected, we will introduce a capital gains tax. If elected, we will raise the levy on GST.

If elected, we will get children out of poverty.

So all those things are promised.

And then what happens is no single party tends to get an overall majority in our mixed member proportional system.

It's happened once in recent memory after Covid, but usually you've got multiple parties who need to come together to form a coalition.

Now, lots of the manifesto commitments don't match, and so what they have to do is nut out an agreement.

And if you are lucky, this doesn't happen every time they will publish those agreements.

Um, these are really helpful if you're interested in knowing what current government policy is.

The start of this government, they published a 100 day plan,

which was even more useful because you knew what the immediate priorities were, but they stopped doing that.

And another place you can look for policy information is what's called the BIM or the briefing for incoming ministers.

And those are documents where advice is sent from departments to new ministers saying, hi, Minister,

if I was the incoming Minister of Social Development or Justice or Business, Innovation and Employment, these are the things I would have on my radar.

Now, the Minister might agree or disagree,

but that's an opportunity for all that institutional knowledge from the departments who are not susceptible to the political winds of change,

to put their opinion forward on the key issues and policy levers that the Minister might pull.

After that, the minister might announce their priorities and they might announce a portfolio of work, or they might not.

And during all this, as you'll learn tomorrow, ministers, cabinet, Parliament need to be flexible enough to respond because emerging issues happen.

One minute the world's peaceful. The next minute there's a war in Iran. One minute.

New Zealand's having a quiet patch in terms of earthquake the next minute.

There's been a whole rash in a few weeks and people are getting nervous and aware about earthquake risk again.

They have to be nimble. So this, in a nutshell, is how change happens.

And the next couple of slides, doc, into what Mark told you about things like the Living Standards framework.

So again, back to providing technical advice to influence decisions.

There's multiple points where politicians or officials may seek advice.

And this is the process for change. And this is the one you need to influence if you need to change the system.

So here are the agencies providing advice. They go to the minister.

Sometimes the ministers are absolutely convinced but cannot convince the cabinet colleagues.

And looking around that table with three different parties in one cabinet, you can see why.

Um, so ministers compete for resource and compete for priority around the cabinet table.

So that's an internal battle.

Once things escape from cabinet and decisions have been made using whatever mechanism, we don't know those meetings are private.

Then those decisions go to Parliament. And if everything's functioning as normal,

cabinet decisions would fly through Parliament because the people in cabinet are in parties that have a majority in Parliament.

And so the decision should be made.

But sometimes, and you've heard this recently, if you're a political junkie, one party won't support a cabinet decision,

and then it might not make it through Parliament without support from another party.

So there's a little bit of negotiation between cabinet and Parliament to actually get to the stage where agencies can implement.

So, for example, the free trade agreement with India. New Zealand first withdrew its support and Labour stepped in.

And that's how it got through Parliament. Unusual, but increasingly not unheard of.

Once all this has happened, somebody has to pay for it. And so there's a separate cycle.

And this is what Mark talked about, which is the budget process.

So all these conversations ideally take place in June to November, so that Cabinet and Parliament have a strategic view of what they need to do.

Then there's some argy bargy to get to a decision phase about what might be funded, what might not.

An awful lot of detail needs to be fleshed out.

All departments have to get Treasury to take an independent look at their beds and say yes or no.

We think this is good value for money. We do not think this is good value for money.

We think this is pretty cool, but we can't afford it at the moment.

Whatever Treasury decides to say and all that is a secret until budget day, which is usually in May.

And that's when all the departments find out if their initiatives got funded.

Some ministers are happy, some ministers are unhappy, and everybody looks at what the priorities of the government are in terms of money.

It's going to spend next year. What about the Living standards framework?

I hear you cry. So we learnt about this in Mark's lecture.

And remember, the Living Standards framework gives you a structure in which to think about the non fiscal costs and benefits of any initiative.

This is the traditional budget process again. The Treasury in the middle assesses initiatives with a focus on value for money and strategic alignment.

At that point, it will consider. Is it good for the other capitals?

Is it good for social cohesion? Is it good for wellbeing in general?

It will have developed the indicators for the year agreed with by the Minister on the budget priorities,

and all the non-financial aspects will be included, probably as trade offs and synergies.

So you might say, yes, Minister, that initiative will save the country $1 billion.

That will be fantastic because we won't be paying interest on $1 billion of borrowing.

The trade off will be 10,000. More children might fall into poverty, according to the agreed indicators.

So you might want to offset that with some investment to make sure that doesn't happen.

Those sorts of things come from the Treasury. It doesn't matter what advice is given.

Ultimately, we're in a democracy. We elect the ministers democratically.

It's their call. So they can make their own decision about trade offs.

They can get their own advice. That is how democracy works.

So this whole system is there, but it's not perfect.

There's many, many occasions with governments of all stripes where advice is signalled.

That might get ministers into trouble later if whatever they decide doesn't go well.

But in the moment, there's nothing to say that they have to take the advice.

So what they call the policy process is what happens next.

So we've got through the budget and there might be a problem or there might be an opportunity.

And this is the sort of situation you'll be in at the beginning of your assignments.

What's the problem? What's the opportunity. There might be some objectives that the government is trying to achieve.

And what's needed is some options, some cost benefit analysis, some idea about implementation and some advice.

And in general, this is the window where officials seek engagement with experts.

So you might imagine in your assignments that you are feeding in here,

focusing the objectives, working out the options and looking at the cost benefit analysis.

Many of us who've been in a role advising government wish there was more expert advice here, figuring out how to measure and monitor.

But that tends to be where advice gets sought.

So just looking at each of those steps in turn, what are the current settings?

What's the problem? What will happen if we don't change the settings?

So Mark and Amanda have said many times one of your options is to do nothing.

That's what will happen if we don't change the settings for anything you propose.

You should always think, how is this better than what we've got now?

How is this better than the status quo? And then you need to think who's most affected in the current settings.

Who's got a problem that needs solving, what's the opportunity they might seize,

and how does that change if you shift in terms of objectives in this case, for policy, it's what the government might be trying to achieve.

In the case of your assignment, it'll be slightly different depending on how the brief is framed.

But you will have a clear audience that you're delivering to. And you should ask, what is that person trying to achieve?

Why are they seeking my advice? As you frame those objectives, it's helpful to think how will we know if it works?

What criteria might we use? Remember when we talked about plastics?

I said it was really hard to know how much plastic went into the ocean. So how would you know if you had improved that problem?

But methods have been developed to address that for any problem or any opportunity you need to think about how you'll know you've succeeded.

And then you're going to need to identify options. You've had lots of support on that.

You need to think about the scale, the scope, something you might roll off the table because it's a crazy idea that might not work,

or because it's way too expensive, because you've looked at the budget. Um, in government,

it's often helpful to understand whether you can just get on with the change you're recommending or whether it would need a regulation change,

which is hard, or a law change, which is even harder because you have to go through very many more steps.

So for our plastics work that I've talked about,

one of the advantages was all the changes we recommended are within the the Waste Management Act of 2008.

So there was a waste minimisation program put in place and we were operating through that.

Similarly, in fisheries, I told you how difficult that was and how we struggled with our scope.

But the recommendations that we made that could be actioned immediately were all within the Fisheries Act.

If you go outside the Act, you have to put in a whole extra saga that can take years to create new legislation and that slows things down.

How other countries solve the problem is also really useful. It's not always translatable to New Zealand, but often it is.

Marx talked you through this in some detail, so I won't go on about it.

This would be the same in government as it would be in business. Look at the options.

Look at the cost benefit. What stacks up? What are those critical success factors?

Are your problem statements and solutions addressing them?

Are you doing the most sensible thing? Are you getting the best bang for your buck?

Does the benefit outweigh the cost? And in a government context, as advice goes up to ministers,

there will be advice on who might deliver this change when realistically it could be implemented.

And again, how we know if it's successful and then off goes.

The advice tends to be short and snappy with a summary process and recommendations tends to be options for the minister to choose between,

with clear outline of the risks and what happens next. And again, that's where the technical information goes in.

I was in a privileged position because I got to put technical information in at the end, advising the Prime Minister or minister directly.

You will, again, if you follow politics, hear complaints by people who believe this is a sacrosanct process,

that ministers shouldn't seek independent advice here. They should rely on expert consultation during the policy process.

But both channels are valid in our democratic system and they both happen.

So once all that policy process has happened, the minister says yay nay to whichever option and sets the direction,

and they can take decisions on anything within budget, within their portfolio.

But generally, if they want to make a big change, like I said, it has to go through cabinet who have to agree.

Um, some ministers are much more successful than others, so you'll see ministers swap around.

A couple of those faces around the cabinet table have changed.

That can be for a variety of reasons, but one is because they've got swapped out for someone who's better at getting things done.

And part of getting things done is convincing cabinet that what they want to do is a priority, pitched against all those other portfolios.

Then cabinet looks at the papers, makes the formal decision if necessary, and we're changing.

The law, proposes laws to Parliament and then through the budget process, makes sure that the funding is available for the change.

So this is a 2025 budget. You have the link to the 2026 budget, which is the one you should use if you need to look at this for your assignments.

But I've left the 2025 one in here because your exemplars and your good and bad examples that you've seen in lectures so far used this one.

So if you want to go through some of the previous systems project and teams project that will post online and you see the numbers,

they will correlate with this budget. Not, um, not the more recent one.

So this was 2025. What I'm focusing on here is new money.

So the budget has two components. One is what they call baseline, which is the stuff that's committed,

multi-year and always assumed will be funding the things that it's funded for the last few years.

Nothing to stop government saying, you know what, we're not funding that program anymore.

We're funding this one and switch the baseline around. But that's difficult.

Complicated tends to involve job losses. So the focus tends to be on new funding.

So all these numbers are new funding. So in 2025, 5.5 billion went to hospitals and specialist services on top of what was already there.

And you will hear politicians spouting these numbers to show that they put extra funding into key areas.

So there's one that gets talked about a lot a billion for additional cancer treatments.

Education got a big chunk. But if you compare those numbers, not nearly as much as health.

So 5.5 billion for health and 646 million for education, much smaller scale.

Some stuff for the Royal Commission inquiry into abuse in care, which was a big headline for the budget in 2025.

Other bits and pieces for social services and a big year for defence.

So health was the big winner, but defence came in, um,

not too far behind because that was the year where the government had campaigned on and delivered on reinforcing our defence force,

because it was seen as a priority in a world that had increasing geopolitical tension.

So all those numbers get vaccinated.

They come from departments, get checked by Treasury, go to the ministers, get knocked around a bit, go to cabinet.

Out comes the annual budget. All those ideas go into Parliament.

And then there's a whole series of committees to actually turn policy into law if law changes needed.

So you sometimes hear talk of first reading, second reading, third reading.

Basically, there's something called a select committee that has politicians from all around

the political spectrum just trying to find holes in any laws that are proposed,

picking up counterfactuals, saying, hold up, you could do that. But what about this?

Change the draft. Send it to through to Parliament.

It'll get voted on a few times.

And in theory, if the whole process is done rigorously, the final law is in really good shape and likely to endure across governments.

But actually in modern democracies, a lot of that gets subverted and sidelined because the politics comes into play.

So I've been talking about cautious, dry, incremental, often policy processes.

And what happens is that it gets to Parliament, and quite rightly,

because we elected parliaments to give us good decisions based on values and choices.

It gets debated, but sometimes in quite a messy way. So I'm going to show you this video.

It's a conversation between three people, the speaker of the House who ensures that all the rules are in play.

The Prime Minister, Christopher Luxon, and the leader of the Green Party, Marama Davidson.

Now, as it goes through, there's a few things to notice.

One is I've taken this off a website that was critiquing Christopher Luxon position.

I'd like to challenge you to do the opposite and critique Davison's position.

Um, so have a think as we go. Um, we won't talk about it, because getting into a political debate in election year is not a good idea.

But I'd like you to have a look at what's coming up on the clip and then think.

All right. If I was coming at this from a right wing blog site, how would I critique Miranda Davison's analysis?

And I'd also like you to think about a few things. One is that they're talking past each other.

They're not saying, here's a long term problem. How can we get together to solve it?

They're having a real feisty debate. And within that there are contested values.

There's contested opinion on what evidence means and what the value of that evidence is to the debate.

And there's contested measures of success. So you'll see on one side they're talking about the economy.

On the other side,

they're talking about child poverty and going right past each other and have a think about how you could do that better in a better system.

And what I want you to get from the video is that political choices set goals for the system and drive behaviours and impact.

So the person in charge, in this case the Prime Minister, is focussed on certain goals.

That's driving the government system.

If you switched and had Marama Davidson as Prime Minister, you would have different goals and the system would respond differently.

So think about those system goals.

And the overall message is that polarisation and short term thinking is really not suited to solving long term problems.

And that's a crisis with Western democracies all over the world. So have a look at this and think how you critique the other side.

And try not to get too despondent about how they talk past each other.

Question number three, the Honourable Barbara Davidson. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to the Prime Minister here in Nakuru, Yes.

Does he believe his government is doing enough to meet the growing demand for emergency food relief?

And if so, when does he anticipate his tax cuts for the wealthy will start trickling down to

the 1 in 4 children now living in households where food runs out often or sometimes?

Well, look, I'm sorry you got to have to rephrase that question. You can't have a supposition thrown into questions if you want factual answers.

We went through this during the last session. I'm going to be a bit strict on it from this point.

Please have another crack. I will refrains. Does he believe his government is doing enough to meet the growing demand for emergency food relief?

And if so,

when does he anticipate his tax cuts will start trickling down to the 1 in 4 children now living in households where food runs out often or sometimes.

Well, I thank the member for their question.

What this government is doing is we are rebuilding the economy and we are under strong economic management and very uncertain times.

We are making sure that we have got inflation down to 2.2%. It was 7.2% under a Labour Greens government, now 2.22.5.

Interest rates are down 200 basis points. That means for someone with a $500,000 mortgage over 25 years,

that's $300 extra a fortnight freed up to be spent on the economy and to support that family and those individuals.

And for the first time in a long time, our economy is growing again.

Oh, what is his response, then, to the children's Commissioner's statement that the latest annual report on child and youth well-being,

quote, shows a deeply concerning reality for the children of New Zealand.

It shows that on the most basic things, Is like having enough healthy food, safe and healthy housing, and physical health.

We are majorly letting children down. We are going backwards.

Well, I disagree that we're going backwards because our budget 2024 is designed to lift 17,000 children out of poverty.

And unlike the last year of a Labour Greens government that put 23,000 more children into poverty.

So we know we have more work to do, but we are working incredibly hard on all of these issues.

So what does he say to Ember, a mother from Auckland who recently shared with Auckland City Mission that, quote, our cupboard can look so empty.

Some nights I don't eat. I'll make sure the kids have eaten heaps and then I save some for tomorrow night.

End quote. And what is he doing to address food insecurity faced by piano like embers?

Well, what we're doing, as I said before, is we want to grow our economy. We're fit.

You get the idea. You can watch the rest later.

But there are two people with with probably shared values in making sure the country is wealthy and everyone has enough to eat.

Choosing different frames, different political goals, and talking past each other.

So all the policy advice that's been provided on food security has to get channelled through a debate like that.

All of this means that change tends to happen slowly. And the more complex the government system gets, the slower the change.

So this can be a good thing if you don't agree with the changes that are being proposed,

or it can be a bad thing if you really think that urgent and you want to get a wriggle on.

So it's worth questioning yourself as you think how fast things should able to be done in government.

To see if you still believe that if the people in charge don't reflect your point of view.

So when I first got the job as the chief science adviser, I talked to some of the science advisors for Obama,

and they said they spent four years in that office wishing they could do things faster.

And then they were still in their roles when it changed to Trump. And they spent another couple of years saying, thank goodness things go so slowly.

That's an extreme example. But you get lots of examples as you think about drifts in policy direction.

So this is an example, a real example that's just happened where there was a change in immigration settings.

So I'll talk you through it briefly. The problem was there weren't enough people to pick our fruit.

So we grow amazing fruit. We sell it at really good prices.

And the export market that's really good for our GDP. But many in the horticultural industry were complaining that there weren't any fruit pickers.

It was hard to get people locally to pick the fruit because generally we've relied on people coming in from overseas.

So the problem that was raised by the horticultural industry to the ministry and the minister and then by mBIE,

who with the ministry in charge to the ministers in this case, Erica Stanford, was can we fix this?

This is a lose lose. We could be hiring these people and picking the fruit and improving GDP.

And instead we're wasting all this food. We're not even giving it to local people.

Minister Stanford said, yep, that seems like something we could fix. And a good idea doesn't really need any law change.

We might be able to get it done. She convinced her cabinet colleagues that it was a worthy priority.

Parliament passed any laws that were needed,

which in this case I don't think was required and put in place steps to monitor whether this change in policy was working.

And then once all that was decided and it took a lot of work.

So the people working in this team, I know they actually had a very nice work trip all around the Pacific.

Talking to Pacific Islanders, understanding it from the workers perspective.

They talked to all the horticultural growers as about 200 of them.

So representatives of those employers all over New Zealand.

They talk to policy people, they talk to ministers, and they put together what was a good step forward that made it better for everybody.

Again, systems problem probably didn't completely solve it, but moved it in the right direction.

And then the people that have to implement that back in mBIE.

But this is another one of those arm's length organisations, Immigration New Zealand.

What they had to do was implement the policy change, actually operationalise it saying good decisions, but this is how we're going to make it happen.

They had a few it changes that they had to do for anyone that reads the news will gloss over that.

Um, and then they had to actually make sure that the immigration officers on the ground knew the new rules and that one went well.

So that was a really good example of a team going off, getting the evidence,

listening to everybody coming up with options, choosing a sensible option.

And it was really well received. Things that are well received are less newsworthy than things that go wrong,

but you'll find news coverage on the RSC workers scheme was all pretty positive.

All came through on one day, and all the horticultural people whose problem it was were happy that things had moved.

Just to finish, and ahead of Tom's lecture, I want to just reflect on when things can move faster.

To do that, you often need to cut through lots of the layers of government and all the checks and balances that I've talked about,

and that can be really good, or it can be really risky, and it tends only to happen when you get a large consensus across Parliament,

And that is often triggered by what they call never again moments.

So something might happen. It could be an earthquake. It could be a disaster.

In the case I'm going to talk about briefly, it was the shooting in the mosque in Christchurch,

and everyone puts down their political stripes and says, never again.

This can't happen again. How can we make a change for the better?

So most of you will know that there was a horrific incident in mosques in Christchurch,

where a lone shooter killed people at worship and livestreamed the whole thing.

Everyone in New Zealand was horrified across the political spectrum, and Jacinda, then PM,

managed to galvanise support for rapid gun law change in the immediate aftermath.

While everyone was going how can we stop this happening again? Before they'd moved on and started thinking about other things?

So this photograph was taken immediately after the shooting.

That's the PM from the Labour Party. The then leader of the opposition was Simon Bridges.

They were completely on the same team for this. That's local government.

That's Lianne Dalziel, the mayor. That's the local MP, Poto Williams, that's Jenny Cillizza.

Um, representing Pacific communities. I think that's why she was there.

She might have been Minister for Local Government and the deputy prime minister, who was also on the page at that point.

So because there was that broad consensus across the political spectrum, all those steps I've just talked about went super fast.

And it happened in, I think, under three months. So that's just a summary of the mechanics of government, um, that I've talked about today.

You can see just glancing at that infographic that there's an awful lot of steps.

So you're starting here with an idea. You're ending here with something actually changing and happening,

and you've got all these steps to get through in the meantime, in an emergency, which Tom will talk to you about on Thursday.

You can go straight from the problem to the solution.

Avoiding all those checks and balances and making change happen fast.

With good leadership and good decisions, you can get great things happening quickly in an emergency setting.

If you make poor decisions, you may wish that you've gone a little bit slower and invoked some of these checks and balances.

So normally states of emergency, as you'll learn on Thursday, only last for a short amount of time.

So I talked to you briefly about the faculty, White Island eruption and the aftermath.

It was just about a week. We were in a state of emergency for a weather event.

You'll see people pre-emptively declare an emergency to to get the resources to where they're needed

because they're only liberated once the state of emergency has been declared and you'll see it.

It doesn't last that long. A week, month at most. Um, for Covid.

We're in a state of emergency for a long time, and at the beginning it was super helpful all the way through.

It meant we could get things done quickly. But the longer you stay in a state of emergency, the harder it is to justify bypassing all these processes.

So it's worth thinking about when you hear Tom. Well, that looks like a really cool way of making decisions, because it's all nice and fast.

But you do lose the checks and balances, and once you lose the checks and balances, you can start to threaten social cohesion.

So I'll leave it there and I'll see you and everyone online because it's a compulsory lecture on Thursday for Tom on Thursday.

Thank you. Oh.

