[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
If I could tell Kato. Now my hiding my picking my cake, my dinner.

Kato Katoa cured everyone. My name is Professor Deirdre Brown, and I am the Tamu, the deputy dean of the Faculty of Engineering and Design.

And I've been accorded the great honour today of introducing the session where we have this,

and these are two incredible speakers who will be introduced to you in a moment, Simon Mace and Simon Fenton from the City Rail Link.

But I wanted to acknowledge the generosity of the engine 403 team for not just inviting you here today,

but actually inviting the whole university as well.

So my welcome extends to our students from the faculty, but also students from other faculties, including my son,

who I think is in here somewhere, to to join us today because it was felt that the session was so important.

Um, I'd also like to acknowledge the fact that so many of our graduates have gone on to work on the CRL.

It seems like every second graduate from our faculty has done this.

And and not just within the domains of engineering too, as I'm sure will be spoken about today.

This is an important project for our city, which was nominated over 100 years ago and building started a decade ago,

but has also made a significant change to the urban design of our city, a great improvement on it also.

Architecture. A number I teach architecture,

so a number of our graduates have worked on the CRL and have been leading different parts of it and different stations, and also designed to.

So what we'll hear about today is not just an infrastructure project with significance under the ground,

but also the way that it has opened up our city,

put it on the map, and this has been something that's come through in a lot of the discussion of this,

actually put our city on the map internationally. We'll get us moving around, we'll bring jobs to places, we'll meet new houses,

which some of you will be living in in the city, but also, you know, has turned our city into a vibrant, exciting place.

And so I'm very pleased to be here to hear this lecture.

And I will turn now over to Mark for the introductions. Thank you.

Thank you. Deirdre. I'd just like to welcome him and give her a big no.

My Heidi. My. To those outside of the engine for a three course.

Who attended today? Um, just a bit of background.

Our students are fourth year engineering students, learning a lot of the tools that they'll need to really apply in their careers.

Learning about things like business cases, learning about what the reality of these engineering projects really look like.

And so we're really happy to welcome Simon Fenton and Simon Mace to talk to you a little bit about what they've

done over the few over the years that they've been through this project and some of the things that they've faced.

So please give them a warm welcome to Simon Fenton. Simon. Mace. Chiara.

Couto. Katoa. Core. Simon. Mace. Tokugawa. Hello and welcome.

My name is Simon Mace. A little bit of introduction on myself.

I did Mechanical Engineering and a master of Engineering Management at the University of Canterbury.

I'm a chartered mechanical engineer in the United Kingdom.

I've got 25 years experience working in New Zealand, Australia and the United Kingdom, and that includes 17 years in the rail sector.

Most of my roles have been in client organisations and mainly in the design management area.

Some of my project highlights and with a few photos. City Rail link obviously what we're here to talk about today.

The North End rail upgrade that was with KiwiRail. We can see a brick line tunnel there.

Bottom right Auckland light rail. I did a stint on before coming back to City Rail Link and also High Speed two in the United Kingdom,

which is the long viaduct that you can see in the top right there.

I'll just hand over to Simon. Okay. So Simon, Fenton.

So I'm I'm the Aecom transport group leader.

So I run the Aecom transport business, but also I was the Link Alliance CPS manager and try not to get acronyms.

So CPS is construction phase services and we'll get into a little bit about that later.

So I graduated to Newcastle University in the UK with a master's in civil and structural engineering,

and we've got 17 years experience working in the UK,

New Zealand and the Pacific Islands, which has been exciting and I've got experience in both the contracting and consulting world.

So I started life as a contractor, but moved into the consulting world later on in my career.

And I've got a background in roading, rail, energy, water, buildings.

I'm a bit of a generalist. So yeah, so I've got a very vast range of experience.

Um, but yeah, not an expert in anything. Um, so highlight projects for me.

Um, city Rowlings. I've been on the project for six and a half years.

Um, I was the design manager and delivery manager of Southern Corridor Improvements,

which is a large portion of State Highway one, widening works from manicured and stacking in.

Um, I did a really exciting two years over in Fiji doing utility upgrades and new roading.

So if anybody's been to Fiji and driven a general. You'll have driven on my roads, which is cool.

Um, I did a stint in Christchurch as part of the earthquake recovery,

so I was seconded into Christchurch City Council to support their building consents team as they went through.

Um, a vast amount of buildings and applications post recovery. Um, I was a contractor, projects engineer on Manchester Energy from waste,

which was turning, um, uh, recycled and waste materials into energy and production.

And I started off life in rail, so I've done a bit of a full circle. And my first job was Kings Cross Eastern Range.

So it was a new platform at King's Cross station in London, along with a big heritage upgrade.

So yeah, some cool projects. Oh, I should call that as well.

My four loves of my life. I've put them in the bottom corner. That's my fiance, my daughter, my dog and my football team.

Bradford. If anybody knows that. So I should shout out to the four loves of my life.

You're good to go. Yeah. So, um, today's journey, because we've talked on the train, we're going to go on a journey.

Um, so yeah, so we're going to go into a little bit of what is CRL, the history of the project, and we're going to touch upon the business case.

So what we intended on doing and then what we ended up delivering.

And then I'm going to start talking a little bit about construction phase services, which is something I'm really passionate about.

It's where it's what I've been doing on my career for the last sort of ten years,

and that is a middle ground between the contractor and the consultant.

So a really cool space. And within that we're going to go through stuff like quality assurance.

We're going to go through some communication techniques, how we manage change really a bit about engineering judgement.

So thinking outside of just our design codes, um, and then we're going to do some cool things.

We're going to look into some of the, the photos of the finished products.

And Simon and I are going to talk you through really about the scale of this job. So yeah.

Exciting. Radio.

The project City Rail link, uh, such an exciting project.

It's really, really important and close to my heart. Um, 11 years ago, I came back from a long stint overseas to work on the City Rail Link.

At the time, I had a young family, so it was quite a big decision. But here we are 11 years later, about to open the project in 30 days time.

It's a really exciting time to be in Auckland. Cut a few of the headline figures.

3.45km of twin underground tunnels, four new and upgraded stations, a total project cost of 5.5 billion NZD,

doubling Auckland's rail capacity to 54,000 passengers per hour and the peak time deepest point below the city 45m.

And yeah, as I said, opening date. Get this one burned in your mind.

13th of September. Right?

An overview. How does it. How does it fit together? Well, as you can see in grey is the existing rail network.

And so that the City Rail Link quite simply fills in that gap.

But it does so much more than just filling in the gap. New stations, new locations that are served by rapid transit.

Um, the ability to run nine car trains in the future.

At the moment, all trains that run on the Auckland network are either 3 or 6 car,

but with future proofed the City Rail link to be able to run 50% longer trains than we run already 100 year asset life.

Obviously planning for the long term and one more time opening the 13th of September, right?

A bit of a different view. Uh, view towards the east.

Um, showing down down at Waitemata. Uh, cut and cover tunnels up, up Albert Street to Te two, then into twin bore tunnels, 2 to 2 to Mong Fu.

And also there are some sections of mined caverns. So they were at Karanga, a happier station, and also caverns up at Mong Fu.

Uh, I made a note turnouts underground among fo in those caverns.

That's particularly important. That turnouts is something you would never normally put underground,

but due to the layout and how the how it has to work, we were forced to put turnouts underground.

So that's quite a unique thing in New Zealand.

Vertical profile obviously an exaggerated scale down at Waitemata all the way up to Monga for maximum rail gradient of 3.5%.

That's actually 1% steeper than the normal network maximum of 2.5%.

Obviously that's set by the topography of the existing land watch Mata being lower,

mofo being higher, and the fact that at stations flat or 0% track grade is an absolute must.

We cannot have we do not have track on a slope.

So what that does in between those sections where the stations are is drives the overall gradient even steeper.

It will take approximately three minutes to travel between each of the CRL stations.

Right. The benefits. It unlocks Auckland's rail network.

Obviously doubling that about that rail capacity. Train at least every ten minutes.

Cuts outer suburb commute times and also serves the new locations.

Doubles the number of people living within 30 minutes. Public transport commute of Auckland city centre.

It's easy to say, but think about that doubling the number of people.

So that's really important in the in the wider sense.

Up to 2000 people were employed on site during construction.

It's an attractive alternative to the car to car travel, award winning, world class station designs,

and a lasting social legacy in the upskilling of workers who have worked on the project.

A little bit about the contract strategy and how it was delivered in terms of the different contracts.

There are three early works contracts contract one,

which was done at White Matter the Downtown Shopping Centre, commercial Bay, Early Works and Contract two.

Next was contract three.

So that's the Link Alliance works stations, tunnels and rail systems, which is by far the largest and that is Link Alliance as well.

Myself and Simon have been working as part of and there were also C8, C6 and C9 which were supporting wider network works.

Partnership has been a key part of the project, so when you get to visit the stations,

you'll see the Maori creation story depicted in the station designs.

The names for the stations are.

You've probably heard them many times, but Mong Pho Toyota to Karanga are happy, and Waitemata, which was formerly known as Britomart.

The names reflect the cultural narrative of the areas of these stations they will serve, and they are also mirrored in architectural design.

A little bit more detail on each section of the route down at the station, formerly known as Britomart,

was turned from a terminus to a through station and renamed to Waitemata, the chief Post Office.

So that's the heritage listed building under contract one had tunnels built underneath that heritage building.

Tunnels under lower Queen Street were built, and the existing lower Queen Street was converted from a road to the public.

Tongue Square downtown shopping centre, which was demolished in 2016,

has the has twin CRL tunnels through the basement and contract two as the cut and cover up Albert Street to Wyndham Street.

A couple of photos just from those contracts I've just talked about.

Photo on the left is standing sort of with your back to commercial Bay looking up at the CPO at Britomart.

So those are the tunnels across a lower Queen Street.

And then obviously on the right is the the finished product.

Very complicated civil works under the sensitive heritage listed building, which is that buildings over 100 years old opened in 1912.

The building was first supported on a temporary structure, with the excavation for the tunnels occurring underneath.

Tunnel structures were built and then the tunnel, and then the building was lowered back onto the new support.

So really, really complicated stuff. Lower Queen Street was cut and cover construction, as I said, creation of a square.

And I recommend if anyone has not looked at the paving that is in that square on an aerial view on Google from above.

Have a look. It really does look amazing. Right.

The commercial Bay or precinct properties section you may have seen on the left.

That's the sparkling new PwC tower. What you may not know is on the right hand side is that building was being built.

You can see it maybe a little bit hard, but in the middle of that photo on the right hand side, you can see the CRL tunnels taking shape.

So at the same time the building was being built, that is when the tunnels were built.

The timing of that construction through commercial Bay was really important,

because it was the one opportunity to utilise the route up to Albert Street.

If we didn't build those tunnels at that time, we could never come back and do those runs later.

So that was really important contract to that.

This photo is looking south, I say up at Upper Albert Street.

It's a bit odd saying south and up. I know.

Cut and cover construction piled, retaining on both sides of the open trench excavation down to the below future track level.

Temporary propping to support the retaining with a reinforced concrete.

Tunnel cells were built in sections at the bottom of that trench using a reusable formwork, and then the tunnels were backfilled on top.

And then the Albert Street, as you see now, was reinstated on top.

Right. Tier two station set to be New Zealand's busiest station.

It's the key to Mid Town's regeneration. The name D2 relates to the stream which still runs underneath Queen Street.

There will be two. There is two entrances to the station at Wellesley Street and at Victoria Street.

There's also a subsurface full length concourse between Wellesley and Victoria, which is free to use if it's raining.

So if you find yourself at one end and want to get to the other, use your hopper, your pay wave card tagging at one end tag out at the other end.

You get 20 minutes and then you can stay dry.

Top down construction diaphragm walls from street level excavations down to pouring roof and floor slabs and excavation underneath those slabs,

and then repeating down the number of levels.

Point to note is the heritage bluestone wall, deconstructed block by block and then rebuilt after the station blocks had been built.

So that's an amazing sort of heritage piece that's been reinstated. It's a great location for university students because I have checked in.

The distance from the Wellesley Street entrance is about 900m to where we are now,

so depending on how fast you walk, that'll be under ten minutes from a rail station.

Karangahape two entrances, one at Mercury Lane, next to the Mercury Theatre and one at Beresford Square.

Passengers will descend the 33m at Beresford Square using New Zealand's longest escalator.

There's a bit of a story to it. It was going to be longest in the southern hemisphere before one was, I think, installed at Martin Place in Sydney.

So blame the Australians for that. Um, the the number the name Karanga are happy is a grammatical correction of the charanga happy as we know it.

Um station technique. Um, due to the depth below ground level, it was mined.

Construction complex, underground construction and services packaging were required to fit into the underground spaces.

Right. Mongo station is on the same site as the original Mount Eden station.

So now we have four platforms there, so two on the North Auckland Line and two on CRL.

The CRL platforms are subsurface in a trench, so if you've used new line or somewhere like that,

it'll be a similar type of thing down into the ground but not covered. The east facing connections are underground,

so they connect from the CRL tunnels to the North Auckland Line and the Grafton direction, but you won't see any of that underground.

Several platforms continue on towards Kingsland. Put a note three grade separated junctions in one of those underground.

That's really complex in its own right. And yeah, some of it you just don't.

Don't even see there's an extra three storey building on site, which is the ventilation building.

So that houses tunnel ventilation fans and rail systems equipment.

The site was used as the main construction site for CRL, so that supported the tunnel boring machines.

Two drives which both went from this site from from Mong Fo northbound to Toyota two.

There's large development potential on the land around the station,

so when the station opens it might seem a bit bare, but over time, with development that will that will fill up.

Right onto the business case. I absolutely say out front I am not a transport economist or a a business case expert.

So what you're getting is the sort of engineer's view of, of a business case.

Um, my contributions to business cases over the years normally mean managing option development through to a preliminary engineering design.

So that is enough engineering design to inform a cost estimate.

But I did go back to the 2015 business case for City of Burlington that was based on the New Zealand government better business cases model.

So that's a standard model. Turns out it's actually five different cases.

There's the strategic case, which is the case for change. Why why do we why would you do it.

So obviously the what was used in the business case of the same, um, same objectives that we are delivering now.

So the same list. So that's that's reassuring. The other cases, the economic case that's identifying the best value option.

So options including a preferred demand forecast economic appraisal what including wider economic benefits.

I had to remind myself what's a wider economic benefit.

So that's something you put a dollar value to and it takes into account additional economic output created because of better

businesses ability to recruit better staff workers having more opportunities and businesses becoming more productive.

There's also the commercial case. That's how a how the project would be delivered.

So procurement and contract strategy and potential providers.

There's the financial case. So that's benefits and costs. Much talked about thing that often comes out of business cases benefit cost ratio BCR.

And then there's also the management case which is the proposal for how you would manage and deliver the project.

So the kind of internal project planning and that I will hand over to Simon.

Awesome. Really interesting stuff. So yeah we're going to go on to contract through now, which is what my background is.

Um, so yeah, I'm going to just do a brief intro. It's what I'm going to talk about is really consultancy engineering doesn't end with a drawing.

So my life is sitting between design and construction.

Um, so whilst you usually end of a consultancy services is delivery of a drawing for someone to go build it, there's actually life after that.

So hopefully I can share some of the uh some cool stories from that.

So really learning outcomes I'm going to talk today is really understanding engineering consultants role during construction.

Um how do we apply quality assurance principles during construction?

Um, a little about our communication skills and how help in providing clear technical clarifications.

Um, how do we navigate change in a project like this? Change happens.

It's inevitable. So how do we how do we do that in a in a structured manner?

Um, and really about how do we apply engineering judgements in very complex and dynamic environments.

Um, just on the right hand side, this is a really cool photo.

This was when the the first TBM breakthrough was, um, just a great shot showing the number of nationalities as well.

I think there was 13 different nationalities just in that one shot alone,

but beyond the project, far more so you can spot me with my England flag right in the middle.

So a little bit about the, the, um, the contract.

So, um, this is an alliance contract. So, um, an alliance contract is a is a relationship style arrangement.

Um, it really it brings together the client, the contractor and the consultant team together to deliver the project.

And in doing that, we share all the risks and we share all the rewards. So it's one where we come together.

So it's different to like a design and construct where the constructor goes away.

They provide a lump sum and they have to deliver within that budget or a traditional when we would sit on the client side.

So the story I'm going to tell you today is really around, um, how do we work with an alliance model?

A lot of the skills I'll talk about are transferable, but it does it.

If you're in a D and C or a traditional, I'll add a different contract mechanism in terms of managing variation and price.

So um yeah. Alliance hats on today please.

So the Link Alliance is a is a group consisting of City Rail Link who is our end client?

It's got three construction teams in Vinci Grand, Project Downer and Solar Batch.

And the three consultants are Tonkin Taylor, Aecom and WSP.

So that makes up the Link Alliance. There was also a number of other consultants or sub consultants that were included in that.

For example, we had Grimshaw who were architects. We had Jacobs who were doing earthing and bonding specialisms, and we had a number of others.

There's a, there's a, there's a range. Um, so yeah, construction phase services or CPS if you haven't heard of that.

So yeah, we're um, we're part of a puzzle. So we're the middleman between the design team and the construction team.

So the design team is focussed on getting those drawings ready, getting it out, getting it consented and over to the contractor.

And the construction team takes it, they start building it.

And then what we do is we help navigate that interface between the design team and the construction team.

So a really, really important job and something that people don't necessarily understand.

They think when you're a consultant, you just do drawings. And when you're a contractor, you build.

But there's actually a really cool middle ground, which I love, which sits right in between the two of them.

So we're in construction based services.

We've got three pillars and we've got quality, which is about the sharing and work, assurance of work and protection of the design intent.

We've got technical clarifications, which is our RFCs. And how do we yeah, give additional information that's needed from the construction team.

We also help manage change. So when we want to do something differently um, it's.

Yeah. How do we how do we support the, the team to do that? So why do we need us?

Um, there's always going to be unknowns and unknowns such as utilities or ground conditions.

That means that we have to navigate. Um, we we support the change process when things need to do differently.

We support re sequencing and interface changes and material supply availability.

It's not always especially when we're going through a Covid environment, which we'll touch upon later,

and we contribute to safety and well-being, as everyone does within the within the industry.

It's really important that none of us wear the ownership of that.

We all do. We all do. It's not one. It's not one group. We also drive performance and quality.

So a little bit of a starting point for in terms of a sign off process.

If anybody doesn't understand the building consent process, um, there's the reason we got these things called producer statements.

And that's what gives counsel the confidence that what is being designed and constructed is, is safe and is performs in a, in a functional manner.

So where we sit so we PS1 designed by the design team based on the drawings.

You then get an independent checker depending on the scale of the project.

So that would be another design consultant who would check those drawings to make sure they're correct.

It then goes over and to get built and the construction team sounds a PS3 to say,

yeah, we've built what's on the drawings and what we do is sign a PS4,

which basically saying through the observation that we've seen,

we believe that the construction team have done a really good job, and we're happy to say that that's good to go.

In the meantime, as well, CRL also runs a parallel process of sign off.

So whilst the producer statements are focussed on the building consent sign off, the design certificate process is very, very similar.

It's DC ones to DC force, but that's about the project requirements, the client requirements.

So very similar process where the design teams say, hey, I've met the requirements.

The construction team says, yep, we've built it as per the requirements. And then we come in and say, yeah, great, looks fantastic.

We're happy.

So just to note as well, for anybody who wants to sign a producer statement, especially for the design team, you do have to be a chartered engineer.

So that will be a process that majority of you will end up going through in your career.

So that's part of Engineering New Zealand. And that is a fundamental requirement of being able to sign off a design produce statement.

So when design meets reality. So drawings are great, right?

But there's always things that occur on site and there's always things that change, which means that we may have to deviate from the drawings.

So when the drawing says, for example,

in our project that the ground is East Coast Bay formation sandstone stilts zone consistent, we think easy TBM brilliant.

It's just going to go straight through. What actually happens is that we get pressure changes.

We're working underneath live motorways, which causes vibrations and issues.

We're going past heritage buildings, sometimes metres away from heritage building foundations.

In some cases we had temporary works from foundations of buildings.

So the Aotea Centre, um, it had some old steel strands which we used in temporary works to build the foundations.

Our machine had to go through those, so we had to find ways that we could de-stress those.

And then that allowed them in a place that wasn't going to clog up the TBM and damage it.

So. Sounds simple. Never is. That is just a consistent story that you guys are going to find in your careers.

So, um, yeah. Also utilities, we always say that utilities in the right place.

Utilities are never in the right place. Right? They're never in the right place.

They've always been put in, never been as bill correctly.

And you'll consistently find surprises, especially when we're in the city centre of Auckland.

It is a bird's nest of of utilities. It's crazy how busy it is.

One trade may finish. We always think that one trade is going to cleanly finish for the next,

so we think there's a nice programming stage and now one trade is going to get delayed.

And then we've got to find ways to navigate the next trade to get a move in.

And that may require change. We assume that materials are going to arrive exactly on program.

And then we go into a global pandemic and there's lockdowns and supply chains.

They don't care about our program. So we've got to find ways about how do we get materials in to keep the project moving.

Other thing is like cable specs, we base cable specs around assumed as electrical equipment are in design,

and once again we might have to change that. Materials may to change those those equipment those equipment may draw more power.

Which means that we've then got to go back and change our cable sizes to cater for the new power.

It's just a constant process, and that's why it's so important to have this interface. The paperwork behind every project.

So this is an inspection test plan. This is a start to finish guide for how do we show that we're meeting the quality expectations of the project.

So each one of these will be based on a certain work and function.

So this one is about in-situ cast concrete for the mounted and civil tunnels.

So the construction team will put this together. They'll base this on the specification that's provided for the designer of what we expect.

So there'll be things like concrete strength. There'll be things about the mix of it.

There'll be things about the post port checks. There's a range of checks that we'll end up doing through this.

And part of CPS job is to work with the constructor to make sure that the whole

points and witness points that have been assigned to us are being ticked off.

The quality evidence has been gathered,

and this effectively becomes our consolidated lump of information that allows us to sign a PS4 at the end of the day.

So inspections and monitoring. So I just mentioned that during the day as part of the ITP, we've got whole points and witness points.

So the whole point is a mandatory stop of works until the CPS team has come along and had a look at it and said they're okay.

So we'll go out and do inspections. So inspections might be for steel reinforcement cages before you pour concrete.

It might be to make sure that cable trays have been fitted properly before we start putting cables on them.

So it's a whole point to say, hey, we're just going to stop now and have a look because there's a point of no return.

Once the concrete has been poured, once we've pulled all these kilometres of cable, it's very difficult to go back in time.

So we have a start point. We also have witness points. And those witness points are things that we may want to attend.

It's based on confidence. If we see that the constructor is doing a really good job, we might pull back on some of the witness points.

If we feel that they're maybe struggling or it needs a little bit more, um, maybe it will look over.

Then we may increase the number of witness points that we look at. So all this is really based on relationships.

So once we're in this we're usually based in the office on a smaller project you might

find we're back at your design office and you'll get a call from the contract saying,

hey, I've got a pour tomorrow. Can you come down to site and have a look at it from me?

So it's all about communication, those relationships. And we'll talk about that a bit later on.

What we're doing is we're checking compliance. We're signing check sheets, we're taking photos, we're releasing whole points.

And effectively all that information in the ITP then goes into a quality pack and that gets that gets reviewed and signed off.

So an example of some of the inspections that I've been doing over my time on City Rail links.

This is um. This is a diaphragm wall construction. This is basically how we built the underground stations at Arthur and K road.

So we use diaphragm walls as a way of doing top down construction.

So what you've got is you've got this big, cool bit of kit called a hydro freeze and with a big drill bit on the end of it.

And that effectively drills from the surface down. And at K road it drove to 43m.

We then fill the the excavation with a liquid called bentonite, which is a sort of clay based material.

Um, and then we drop in a cage. So this cage, I think that you can see in the bottom, that was the longest cage for K road.

It was. Yeah, I think it was 30 odd metres when we can splice them together as well.

So you drop that in and then what you do is you um, you add concrete, it's trimmed from the bottom that displaces the bentonite out of the top.

And then you effectively had this big concrete wall cast in the ground. And you do this over and over again.

And so you've got the foundations of the building and then you dig it out.

So that's why it's called top down construction. So that's a bit of insight into that.

But really what my job was was, you know, I was checking the method statement. I was making sure that, you know, they were set up to, to to do it.

Right. I'm checking the reinforcement of the cages to make sure that's that's all correct.

We're checking that the bentonite has got the right consistency so that it's going to retain the ground.

Remember, we're in a city centre environment. We're two metres away from building some high, high rise building foundations.

It's nerve wracking stuff when you start digging out ground right in front of a skyscraper.

Um, so we're making sure all that's right, we're checking the depth of the cup, the cleanliness of the base poor.

We're checking the concrete mix and the strengths.

And then once it's poured, once it's excavated, we go back, we look at it, we make sure the wall is looking good.

And at the end of the day, we get all the information in the ITP and we sign it off.

So this is a very not normal process, I guess, for the level of input that will do into a construction job.

Now it will depend on the level of construction monitoring different complexity jobs will require more CPS input than others,

so obviously this was a really high risk one. I think it's CM five monitoring, which means that we're there full time.

But you may find on some of the smaller jobs that you may work on in the future, that it may be less input on that.

But generally in CM five is that we're there to see everything so things don't go right.

And that's a given. Um, we use a thing called non conformance reports which basically if something goes wrong how do we fix it.

So there's a few examples there. We've got some um some matting on a concrete diaphragm wall.

We've got a damaged lift door and we've got an overloaded cable tray.

Um so what the non conformance report does is it allows us to go cool.

Something's gone wrong. How do we fix it and how do we learn from that.

So what you find is usually the constructor will hate these because they'll think it's just go having a go at their workmanship.

But it's really, really important in making sure that we are learning so we don't repeat the same mistakes twice.

So we identify what the problem is. We record where it is. We assign the responsibility of who's going to fix it.

We agree what the corrective action is and what went wrong.

And what it does is it provides an audit trail and a record so that we capture the what goes, what's gone wrong.

And it's captured in our as builds. It's captured in change management.

And it then it goes in on the in the handover documentation.

So I just really wanted to focus a bit on communication for a while.

Like as engineers we always just focus on how to design, how to build, you know, all the very techie stuff.

But actually at the heart of good engineering is communication, is good communication.

And whilst a lot of people see it as a soft skill, I don't I see it as a hard skill.

It's something that you, you'll find will help you in your career.

Been able to communicate effectively is going to help you create stronger relationships,

which is going to help you both internally in your business, but also on your projects.

Um, there's so many projects that have issues which are just down to poor communication and poor relationships,

not because of someone's technical ability.

So it's just something I really want to touch base on because it is it is something that I think we sometimes lose track of.

It's a skill. You can learn it. It isn't just about, hey, I'm, I'm a nice person or I'm a bit of a meanie.

It is a skill that you can learn. So, um, yeah. So there's room to the room to change.

Um, so. Yeah. Um, but obviously communication comes in all ways, you know, on a site, you know,

we have meetings, we have phone calls, we have teams calls, and we send WhatsApp messages.

I think I've sent a couple of Facebook Messenger messages to our to site engineers before when I couldn't get hold of them.

Um, but what the formal line of communication on projects is usually we use these things called requests for information.

Ah, so all the softer forms of communication is great.

And that's about understanding, you know, where we're going to meet you. Where's the meeting going to be?

You know, can we have a chat about this? But what the most important thing is that decisions are captured formally and that way.

Can we have them as an audit trail? So we use there's usually a number of systems that we can use.

I think we if anybody knows there's one of the systems that we use, it's a document management system,

but it records the communication, it records drawings, and it's a one stop shop to make sure everything's together.

And so yeah, so once we've had all the software conversations we then formalise it.

So we raise an RFI, someone reviews it, we respond the changes then implemented and then someone confirms that,

yeah, it's been implemented and I'm happy. So it's really important that yeah, we're making sure that all decisions are captured.

And I just put a bit of a golden rule here like good good responses explained design intent.

So rather than so for a good example, um,

we had an example on site where there was a construction team wanted to put a temporary box out into one of the slabs.

Right. So he said, hey,

I want to move some reinforcement bars and put a box out on the underside of one of our slabs so I can give access to put some cables in later.

And and so a poor response would just be no.

Right. A good response is to say, hey, look, there's a lot of tension in that area.

So all those bars that are in there are actually carrying a lot of tensile loads.

Moving the bars is going to put a lot of strain on the underside of the concrete beam, and it could lead to risk of failure.

I know if I was a contractor which one I'd want to hear, and it would probably be the latter one.

So it's really important that we're making sure that design intent is explained.

So try and explain the why, not just the outcome, not just the what?

Um, the other thing. Yeah, this one here is about engineering judgement as well.

Um, so that within the construction industry, like balanced decisions need to be made to take into account all of the following aspects.

So it isn't just about meeting code all the time. That is one part of being an engineer is meeting code.

What you've got to also work around is is it safe? Can we afford it?

Is that Is that design going to fit within our program? What's the quality we expect and what does the client want?

At the end of the day. So it's making sure that we are considering all of these.

And what what's easier when you're in a design office.

And that's why we're seeing a lot more models like early contractor involvement models like this.

That's why we've seen a lot more sort of DNC and alliances where the contractors involved.

So that's helping to make design design decisions as we as we move forward.

But we've got a lot of time in that space where we don't have time is when we're on site and something's happened and something needs to change,

and they need an answer now. So engineering judgement needs to come in.

So whilst we use our engineering knowledge, we use our codes of standard, our practice, our maths as the basis for all decisions that we make.

We also need to take into consideration a vast amount of other criteria to make sure that we're going to be okay.

So access is a big thing when you when you're working in City Rail Link at the

minute there is there might be some architectural issues that we need to sort. Some scratches, some dense panels.

So someone's got that number today. Got some dents over there. We need to fix it. It's usually the architects.

There's no architects in the room, is there? Oh, God. Okay, I'll be careful what I say then.

Um, so the architects and the architects will basically want to do some damage when we actually go to site and we look at it,

we go, well, we're gonna have to get some scaffold up here, and how are we going to get the scaffold in?

And then we're going to put a guy up there with now a 20 metre drop beneath him.

And we're going to it's going to be a load of cost. And we've got the risk of damaging something else.

And we've got the station opening next week. So there's all these things that we start considering.

And then suddenly the outcome of fixing the damage panel sometimes falls away.

And the architect was actually maybe, maybe that's not the best idea,

but it's about having this perspective to understand the other risks associated with, um, yeah, making change or changing things on the fly.

So I've just put a little note there. So a good good I know we like our calculation.

So experience plus evidence plus common sense equals good engineering judgement.

That's a good thing to remember. So when the design has to change, what change is inevitable on a project?

It just happens. As I spoke to you before, what we think is going to be on the drawings is never always the case when we get on to site.

So change is something that we need to navigate, but we have to navigate it in a structured way.

Like when we're designing, we have to be structured with our reviews. We have to restrict our consenting.

We have to be structured about everything that we do. When we're on site and we're making change, we still have to follow the same process.

It's really easy for me just to go on site and say, oh, it'd be fine, just do that.

But actually I need to make sure I'm doing my due diligence and make need to make sure that we're following that change process properly.

So generally across the board, this is the process that we follow. So we'll start off where we'll identify a change that needs to happen.

We'll assess it. What are the risks. What are the impacts. Can we get access. Is it safe.

How much is it going to cost? Um, we then develop options and recommendations for how we do it.

We then go for an approval process. And this is like any other design.

We go for an approval process. If it's a minor change, you might need a minor review.

If it's a bigger change, you might have to go back to an independent certifier to check it.

So it depends on the scale of the project of the change. We then issue it.

So we issue a thing called the BSR, which is a design site.

Instruction captures the change and that will be done through our document management system.

And next that we spoke to. And then we take that change and we construct it.

And the construction team comes back and says, I've done it. And we go, brilliant.

Let me have a look at it. So the paper project now, all the sort of sexy stuff is in the big buildings and the construction,

but actually there's a mammoth pyramid of paper project paperwork that needs to be done, the background of this mega project.

So I'll pick up a couple of highlights. We've got 25,630 as built drawings on CRL.

That's a lot of drawings. We've got just over 20,000 requirements that we've got to make to the client.

So 20,000 single lines. Then you must do this.

You must do this 20,000 of them that we've incorporated into our designs.

We've got 109 PS4 sets. We've got 20, what, 74 building consents, 42 engineering plan approvals.

It starts to build a big pyramid, and the top of that pyramid is a practical completion, which we got to the June 30th of June.

We got that. So the the it's all the things I was talking about, like the IPS and all the check sheets and all the evidence contributes to this.

And if you don't get that right, you don't get project sign off.

And it's very, very difficult if you don't get it right at the start to achieve it at the end, you can't make it up.

You can't find photos that were never taken. It's very, very difficult.

So that just gives you a little bit of a snapshot as to the the scale of the paperwork behind us.

Now we can get into some cool stuff. Um, so really, really proud to sort of share some of the final photos.

You've probably already seen these online, but obviously it'll give us an opportunity to start talking through them.

Um, the other thing I'll just highlight as well is that, um,

the what the photos I'm going to be sharing with you, I've compared them to the BIM model.

Um, graphics. So this is what we thought it was going to look like. And then this is what ended up coming out.

So, um, a bit about the BIM before I go into it.

Uh, we ended up achieving, uh, Lod 500 if anybody knows.

BIM. So that's the highest level of Lod that you can get within the BIM.

So it's a fully certified, verified checked model reflects everything, plus all the maintenance requirements as well.

So I tried to take the photos that were aligned with the I tried to align them as much as possible so you can see how close it came.

And this is where. This is where you've gone from.

This is where the importance of a BIM model and the visualisations in achieving what you're actually going to get.

It looks exactly the same, which is just incredible. And some highlights really from the station science touch base and a few of them.

Um, I think one of the favourite parts is probably the art piece in the middle.

This is a beautiful car that was designed by a 21 year old artist who'd never done a piece like that before.

So that was just incredible. He was a 21 year old, so that's amazing if you go see that.

Um, appreciate the, um, the mayor didn't like gold plated.

So right outside the council building, we've got a gold ceiling. Um, so, um.

Yeah. So I'm not sure. I'm not sure how much he appreciates that. I found it quite amusing, though.

Um, anything else you want to pick up on? I thought I might just mention about the use of them.

So back in the, um. You know, when I came back to the project ten years ago, the the.

So bim being building information modelling.

So the 3D, um, you know, digital creation of what was going to be built, it was really useful and in terms of a tool with stakeholders.

So whether it was money groups or I lost count of how many politicians came through the design office.

And you know, the first thing. Show them, show people drawings and it's it's useful.

But you know, the three I think ten years ago when VR was goggles and that kind of thing,

and it was really good in terms of achieving people's buy into the project.

So it's not just a design tool. It was like a stakeholder management tool as well.

Absolutely. No. It helped us navigate a few complex, um, yeah.

Comms issues. Um, can I get happy?

Um, yeah. Like, uh, like Simon said, we were beaten to the, uh, the longest escalator in Southern hemisphere, which I was devastated about.

I think they were two metres longer as well. And I was thinking, can we just stitch something on just to get it a little bit longer?

But it was it was too late, unfortunately. So, um, but yeah, You see, once again, some of the art pieces, the, um.

Yeah, it's, um, it's really, really impressive. So we're super stoked to be getting you guys going down on the 13 for September.

Hopefully you're all going to ride it on the first day. Yeah. Or even open days or even the open days.

Uh, tomorrow for the public. Can I go happy? You do need to have tickets. So.

So it's free, but you need to book tickets or till I order two next Saturday if you if you get a chance.

So. Yeah. Book those tickets. Absolutely. And this is Manga Force Station, once again, a really beautiful station.

It's not an underground station. Um, but, yeah, some amazing features, like the water wall you'll see on the right hand side.

Um, it's a really stunning, um, bit of artwork, artwork which you'll, you'll see.

Um, but yeah, it's got some, got some really cool features.

And I think it is, it is very complex with engineering which you won't, you won't recognise.

What I would say is when you go onto the CRL platform, go down to the western end and look up and what you'll see is our train line,

a train line going above you and then a pedestrian footbridge above that.

So you can actually stand up and you can see three layers of construction.

So you might not get that view very often, but you have a have a recommend, go and have a look and it'll just show you the complexity.

And when manga was getting constructed, we actually had to constantly maintain a single line running train.

And so working within close vicinity and maintaining a functional rail was was really, really complex.

So it might not get the same sort of attention as the underground stations.

But manga was super, super complex. And yeah, just not really not to forget as well that the rail systems,

you'll see like a really cool snapshot of a junction of incidents between MC 20 MC 30 tunnels.

Um, it shows you the the track and all the systems that goes into that.

Um, I really like this photo on the left, which is during dynamic testing of the trains rather than filling it loads of people.

We thought it was sandbags to mimic the weight of people, so I thought that was that was really, really cool.

Um, and then, yeah, there's traction cabins, there's, uh, overhead, um, live wires.

Yeah. Raft. The rail system. So super complex. Um, and then just thought I'd give you some wow facts, which was great.

So pick up on a few of my favourites. Uh, 244,000 cubes of concrete poured 70,000 tons of steel reinforcement.

There were 24,000,000 hours worked on the project.

Uh, 2056km of cables.

So, yeah, it's a lot.

Um, from a sustainability perspective, we had some amazing sustainability initiatives which we won't have time to talk about today,

but it saved around 20,000 tonnes of CO2. Um, from a safety perspective.

We had a we had a process called yellow cards and people on site could issue a little yellow cards.

And that was to say, whether something was unsafe or when something was safe.

And it showed the contribution to that. There was 29,234 yellow cards submitted from a safety perspective, which is just incredible.

Um, so yeah, that's that's quite cool stats, I thought. It just shows the how big this how big this project is.

And then really just to close and these are sort of my key takeaways. Um look consultancy engineering.

That's a terrible typo. Consultancy engineering doesn't stop at a delivery of drawings.

Um, communication documentation and decision making are core engineering skills.

They're not admin. Please learn how to communicate well.

Develop relationships, I can assure you. Or make your, um.

It'll make your careers go a lot further.

Um, change in a project is inevitable, and teams need to be agile to work closely with design and construction.

Um, and for anybody who was interested, there is a career path that sits between consultancy and construction.

I love it. It's great. You get the best of both worlds. So yeah, if anybody's interested, I'm happy to talk about that further as well.

If you want to connect with me on LinkedIn, I'm happy to provide any more guidance.

But, um, just to finish, really. So with one of my favourites phrases is here are my new oto tangata, tangata,

tangata and basically translates to what's the most important thing in the world? It is people, it is people, it is people.

And at the heart of City Link is the people.

Um, we've had over 20 or 15,000 people have gone through the project, 15,000 people, um, which is just incredible.

So, um, that's us. We are at time, but we've probably got time for one question.

