[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Plenty of room at the front. While everybody's filing in.

Give me a wave if you can hear me at the back. Thanks.

Okay. Your settings. Fine. What? What's wrong here?

I think it's just the background noise. Okay.

Welcome, everybody. let's make a start. Plenty of seats down the front for those running in.

Kyoto. Kato. And welcome to engine 403.

And we read all the course evaluations for previous years carefully.

And we know that there is sometimes a little scepticism about what the engine courses might be useful for.

So I thought this year we would start by really focusing on what engine 403 can do for you guys and explain a little bit,

not just about the structure of the course, but how we are going to teach you the skills that we think are useful for you in this course.

So my name is Juliet Gerrard. You won't have met me before.

I'll introduce my co teachers shortly, and we'll just pause a little minute so people can call in and get a seat.

Hopefully the overflow is also working and there's some people in there.

So engine 403 will build on engine 303 and your previous courses.

Um, but it'll do so in a way that takes a big step up from what you've learnt previously.

So most of you are in your last semester of your engineering course now, and when you leave this lovely place,

you will end up in the real world where there are real problems to solve.

And one of the things that distinguishes the problems you'll be solving is they haven't

been nicely framed and put into an assessment format that gives you a challenge.

That's a solvable problem. Some problems just can't be solved.

Some things are just really hard, but nevertheless,

you will all be put in situations where you are trying to solve real world things and you will be using your engineering skills to do that,

but you'll need a lot of other skills too.

And I'm just going to spend a little bit of time today going through some of those, and how this course might help you get equipped to do that.

So you'll have learnt some things about working in small teams, about project management, um, about communication,

and how you interact with people in different disciplines as you've gone through your engine stream.

But in 403, that'll really be on steroids. So we're really going to test a lot of those skills.

And some of you are going to love that, and some of you are going to find it really uncomfortable.

But what I'm going to try and convince you of today is that when you're feeling uncomfortable learning those skills,

that's when you're actually learning the most.

And that when you enter the workplace and find yourself in a tricky situation, you might just think back and go, oh, that's why they did that.

This is actually quite useful because that's the feedback we get from students who've done the course before.

so we'll be building essential workplace skills. And these will complement your technical knowledge.

So we're assuming you're all smart. You've all got technical knowledge from your main subject.

And these are the extra skills you're going to need to make those skills useful in real life in the workplace.

So we're going to be thinking about big problems. Anyone feel like talking to me?

Can you think of a big problem New Zealand's got at the moment? Yeah.

Unemployment, unemployment huge massive system problem that we need to solve.

Anyone got any others? Yeah. AI reliability of AI.

It's hallucinating all over the place. We're all relying on it to make decisions.

That's a big problem. Hard to wrap up into a neat assessment, but a big problem we're going to need to solve anywhere else.

Let's have one more. Yeah. Energy problems.

Yeah. Massive.

Especially in the world of data centres and AI pulling more and more demand on the global energy systems, which is going to raise prices.

Make the cost of living higher. Back to unemployment. So just with those three, you're all aware of these really huge problems.

And engineers will play a role in solving those problems.

But engineering alone is not going to solve all those. So to make this real and relevant, we're not just going to make up problems.

We are going to phone a friend. We're going to call people in government,

and your assessments are going to be guided by actual people in government working on some of these real world problems, more of which later.

So this is not a drill. You will be working on actual challenges that the government currently faces.

So this will help you in the workplace. It'll also help you with interviews.

So a lot of you are probably starting to think, oh, I'm going to need a job.

What am I going to apply for? How am I going to prepare for the interview?

One of the most common questions in interviews is do you prefer working individually or in a team?

Hands up for individually. Be honest, this is not the interview and hands up in a team.

Yeah, so there's a bit of both. Some jobs working individually will be great and some jobs working in a team will be great.

And then the next question will be, can you give us some examples of experiences you've had where you're working in a team?

They will ask for good examples, bad examples, and what role you played in the team.

If you've never really thought about that, those interview questions are really hard.

The first time somebody asked me, I had no idea what to say and the guy leant over and gave me the answer for next time.

Not a good look, but you will be able to draw on the experience in this course and really dig into some of those tricky interview questions.

So here's the teaching team. My name is Juliet. I'm not an engineer.

Full disclosure, I'm a professor in science, and I come over to engineering to do this course.

And the reason I'm here is for six years, from 2018 to 2024, I was lucky enough to be the Prime Minister's chief science adviser.

So I advised Jacinda Ardern, Chris Hipkins and Chris Luxon and I'll draw on that experience in the examples I give you in this course.

So I understand what it's like to take technical knowledge and try and get it into government to influence government decisions.

I trained in chemistry originally, I drifted horribly. My home department is biology and I know a lot about proteins.

None of that helped me in the Chief science advisor role.

What helped me was all the soft skills that we're going to be teaching you in this course.

If we go anti-clockwise, you probably all know Amanda, who's going to give us a wave.

Amanda has been running this course for a long time. She knows everything.

She runs an amazing ship. She makes sure all the assessments are fair.

She makes sure that all the peer reviews are done well, and that all the team assessments come across as fairly as they possibly can.

So thanks Amanda, and most of you will know Mark too. He's our other course coordinator.

You'll see a lot of Mark next week.

He's bringing you a different background with his, um, B.Com side and will really be able to give you some expert advice on business cases,

cost benefit analysis, and all the things you're going to end up doing in your big group assessment.

The special mystery guest contributors I'm not revealing now because they're to do with the assessments.

There are government collaborators for the projects. And Peter, Raquel, you probably recognised from earlier courses.

He will also be around not necessarily lecturing but helping around the edges with the team building and their projects.

So you'll notice we bring a variety of different lenses, a variety of different perspectives, and that's a good role model for you and your teams.

We need to work out who's good at what, who knows what, and all bring a different perspective to solve the problem.

In our case, teaching 800 people the skills they need for the workplace and systems thinking.

So I'm not going to go through all the course admin side today.

It's all on canvas if you want to have a look, and we'll dedicate a bit of time tomorrow for that.

So Amanda will go through the nuts and bolts, make sure you're on top of all the assessments and when and where to submit them.

What I want to just highlight today is this number here. Who's happy that 75% of this course is group assessment?

No hope someone's happy. Anyone unhappy? If I were sitting where you were sitting, how old am I?

40 years ago, I would be going, oh my God. Um, that is generally not a popular number with talented students.

And you're all talented students. The reason we're doing it is to make this course relevant, and to give you that real taste of working in a team.

So we'll put that there up front. You'll be working in big teams. There'll be teams of 30.

When you get to the real world, that will happen to you too. And this is a good practice.

So you'll all have heard of Smart goals either at school or earlier in your, um,

engineering degrees to get you thinking about what you're going to get out of this course.

We are setting you an early assignment.

It's due next week, and that is setting yourself individual goals for what you are going to achieve in this course.

So you all probably know by now that people like to set Smart goals so they're specific.

You can measure them. They're achievable. They're relevant and they're time bound.

So, you know you'd do something by Friday. Or by the end of the course, you won't leave it open ended.

I'm also going to encourage you to make them hard. I'm thinking of putting an H there to make them Smart goals,

because what this lecture is all about is trying to persuade you to push yourself to do really stretchy, ambitious goals.

So we are not going to mark you on whether you achieve your goals.

We are going to look at how you set the goals, how you engage with the goals in the course and how you reflected on them.

So at the end of the course, you might say, you know what? Those were not the right goals to have set and that's fine.

You can get full marks for that. Or you might say, I set a really stretchy goal and I learned a lot, but I didn't quite meet it.

That's also fine. Or you might say I said this goal, but I'd met it by week four.

It was too easy, so I set myself another one. All that's fine. Um, It's just a way of getting you to think.

At the end of this lecture, how you think you might grow through the course and what you might be able to learn,

just you, because you're different from all your peers. So today we're just going to tell you a little bit about the why.

So why we are teaching the course, how we are teaching the course.

Um, and I'm basing that on what the students said last year.

Don't take my word for it. We've got Caleb, who is a real live last year student who is going to come and chat to you a

little bit about his experience of the course and what you might get out of it.

And a huge thanks to Caleb, because he was only asked this morning because the person we had lined up, um, was sick this morning.

So big thanks to Caleb that showed a grit and growth mindset.

Yeah. And then we're going to talk a little bit about T-shaped engineers,

which is a way of framing the skills that we're trying to add on to your engineering degree.

And we're going to talk about growth mindsets and grit.

More of which later. So we read all the course surveys.

And this is what last year's engine four of three students said about this course.

They were generally pretty happy that we were working on real world problems, like actual problems from the government.

So we've increased that element and really emphasising that when we do the big assessments, more of which later, it's hard.

You're working in these big teams that you've never worked in before.

You're solving a problem that doesn't necessarily have a solution.

You're making recommendations to government agencies who you don't necessarily understand, and so you need a lot of support.

So what we did last year, and we'll do this year because it seemed to be popular, was we will run what we call the clinic.

So the three of us will be in a room and then 9 to 5 at least open for questions.

So if you're stuck either on the content, you don't understand it.

Your team's having a meltdown. Three members of your team have disappeared.

Somebody is having a nervous breakdown. The team leader is sick, and you need a new one.

We're there to help you with all those things. And that's because we are asking you to do a very challenging thing.

And that support is useful and all part of the learning curve.

People really like the real life case studies that we included in the lecture, so we've scattered those throughout the course.

People did not like the quizzes. Um, there was some pushback on the quizzes and how useful they were.

So we have tried to make the goal of the quizzes a bit clearer, and we've decreased the weighting.

We've left them in there because it's really important that you engage with the lecture material, because it will help you with your assessment.

And we think that people that engage with the lecture material should get some marks.

So they're there, but we've adjusted them a bit to try and take on board that feedback.

And a few people got grumpy because my lectures in particular talked about politics because we are looking at the government interface.

So especially because it's election year, I want to emphasise, I'm not here to tell you who to vote for.

I don't think I even know who to vote for. And what we'll be looking at is the role of not just politicians, but policy makers.

How you can use evidence to influence government decisions, which ultimately will be up to the politicians.

But that's not the interface we're looking at.

So there's a whole lecture on the machinery of government, which will explain the difference between the policy makers,

the politicians and where you as engineers might fit into that system.

And I've also stopped talking about Covid 19 because everyone gets very twitchy about that.

But if anyone would like to know about Covid 19, I did advise on that.

So very happy to tell you in a smaller group.

At the end of the course, we give you an opportunity to reflect on what you've learned.

I read all of those and it's marked generously.

So like I say, we just want you to think about what you've learned and to give some reflections on the content.

I've just pulled out some quotes which are typical of the sort of thing that many people said.

Um, so this person commented that they noticed that they were growing professionally in the discomfort zone, and I love that term they've used.

So if something's easy and you do it, you don't learn anything. If something's hard, you can't do it.

So it's hard to learn anything when it's just hard enough but not too hard.

That's when you can actually start to learn. And so that's the way we hope the big assessments set, so that you are really growing and learning.

And like many of the reflections that I read, this person is commenting on the need for communication, leadership, collaboration.

They are critical. You can have the brainiest 30 people in your team, but if they don't talk to each other, you won't get a good result.

And so figuring out how it is that you think and communicate how other people think and communicate will make a big difference to success.

Here's another one.

This is someone that has had an aha moment, and they've worked out that they were part of the problem because of their communication style.

So everybody communicates in different ways.

You will as you get to know your team, figure out how best to communicate with different people in your team.

Not everybody thinks like you think. And people have very different ways of working, especially under pressure.

This one was really clear. Coherence beats cleverness. So we do two assessments.

The first one is a warm up for the second one and lots of people in the first project,

the team project figure out that talking to each other and making sure all the bits of the project are coherent and tell the

same story is much more important for nailing those good grades than have each individual bit be brilliant in its own right.

So it's a team sport.

You have to find ways to make sure that your piece of the puzzle gives an overall jigsaw that makes sense to the reader, in this case, the government.

And this one I've put up because it made me very sad when I read it.

And quite a few people said this, um. This was the most extreme example.

But it's true that a lot of you guys communicate first by text and actual in-person contact can be much more successful.

So I thought it was really sad that someone had got all the way to the end of their four years before they'd worked that out,

and I really hope that was a Covid generation thing. And you guys are going to be much more sociable.

But actually talking to people is good, and I see you all doing it now.

So that's a good step, right?

I'll hand over. Thank you. Caleb. Hello everyone I'm Caleb.

That's me third from the left up there. Um, last year I was sitting where all of you were sitting.

I did for three last year. Um, I've finished the engineering science portion of my degree,

and I've moved on to the computer science, which is why you might see me a bit around campus.

I might finally have classes in the engineering building, which will be great.

Um, and if anyone has any questions at any time, feel free to put your hand up.

I'm more than happy to answer any questions. Engineering 4 or 3 was one of my favourite courses.

Um, I learned a lot. Some of you may have laughed there, but, um, but 4 or 3 was a truly amazing experience, especially Systems Week.

It's completely different to normal learning here at the uni, a completely different experience, and I found it so valuable.

I learned a lot of things during this class. Uh, during Systems week.

During Mini Systems week, which might be the team project, I learned project management skills.

Uh, since I was the team leader, I probably did a bit more project management than the other people.

But I made sure that during my, uh, my projects that my team put a heavy emphasis on attacking the critical path of the tasks,

attacking that, and trying to work through the hardest parts. Um, and that was, you know, that was pretty.

That was pretty good. Um, also learned a lot of time management skills.

Um, as a team leader, I probably spent the most amount of time on the project.

Um, but I was only, like, probably like 10% more than the rest of the team.

But don't be too scared if you want to be the team leader. It's actually so much fun.

During mini systems, I tried to attend as many of the team projects as possible.

Um, just was just so that everyone could stay on the same page and um, because during the mini systems,

not all the groups are working at the same time, like the systems week.

But, um, even even though I did end up spending, um, extra time, I would say that the true legends were my team-mates.

They did a lot of work, especially during systems week. The team leader floats around quite a bit during our systems.

However, the team mates are the ones who do like the actual work.

They're the ones knuckle down. They're doing more deep work than me. And for that I have to say thank you to my team-mates from then.

So we had a pretty, um, it was wasn't strict, but we had a pretty semi strict policy of attending in person for systems week.

This, um, was so that we could facilitate conversation better and stuff like that.

We still had like if someone was sick they could stay home. Don't want to like, contaminate everyone else, but we just wanted to get everyone in.

And this ended up developing like really vibey subcultures within the team.

Some of the teams like they weren't beefing, but it was it was just like loads of fun.

And they had like, you know, some like internal sub team like, um, culture going on, which was really cool to see.

This also means that if you're in person, everyone ends up developing like a lot of everyone ends up being able to share their voice much easier.

You know, when you're all sitting down at a table, it's much easier than sitting muted on discord.

Um, so when everyone's, you know, in person, uh, everyone gets the chance to talk more and like,

conversate and like, really come up with better ideas than if you'd been, like, virtual from home.

This was, like particularly important for me as a team leader because I'm like quite social.

I like to talk a lot. So I had to take a step back. You need to like, give everyone the chance to share their opinions.

Um, give everyone the chance to to grow everyone the chance to get in their discomfort zone and get the chance to speak.

Um, yeah. I'm not trying to glaze for three too much, but it was really amazing.

I did learn a lot. Um, you guys are all going to love it. Um, also, uh, quick shout out to Angela Duckworth, who wrote the book grit.

That was amazing. Read. If anyone wants to read that in this time, I would recommend it.

Um, yeah. Not sure if there's any questions. If anyone puts their hand up right now, are more than happy to answer a question.

Uh, but I'll stay around afterwards as well. All right.

Thanks for listening through my discomfort zone. Thanks, Caleb.

Right. So we'll distil all that. Top tips, come to lectures.

It's great you all here. I have it on good authority that there's a data guru in this year that charts lecture attendance.

I would love that data. So if that could get sent to the team, I'll put it up every lecture,

because we would really like to make these valuable spaces for you to attend in person.

They're nice sociable hours this year. So the more you come, the more you talk to people.

The more you get to know your team, the better you will do in your assignments.

The other thing that you do when you turn up in person is you make a network.

So you probably haven't thought about being old yet, but I still rely on people that I was doing my undergraduate with.

So the sort of people that you're sitting with now are smart people. They're going to go off and do great things.

And then ten, 20, 30 years, you're going to go, oh, I know that guy was in my 403 class.

I'm going to give him a call and see if he can help me with this project. It's really useful.

So today, what I hope you get out of the next piece of this lecture is to describe and apply the

key concepts of this thing we're calling growth mindset that I'll explain in a minute.

Caleb just mentioned grit and the Angela Duckworth bit.

And I'll give you a little preview to that to see if that's something that you might be interested in and you might as you set your goals.

Think how growth mindset and grit can be useful in your life and your career.

And we're going to really emphasise this difference between a fixed mindset and a growth mindset.

So what we're trying to do is build on that disciplinary knowledge that you've got and turn you into T-shaped thinkers.

So everybody goes off into the workplace, into the real world,

knowing what they know with their experiences, their skills and their discipline knowledge.

And then they have to learn how to interact with other people.

So one way of framing that, and thinking about what makes for successful professionals and engineers in particular,

is to construct this idea of T-shaped people who can not only draw on their deep disciplinary knowledge, but also innovate.

Collaborate. Know when to step forward. When to step back. Know whose ideas to rely on when in a team setting.

And this has got embedded into all professional degrees around the world.

So this guy, Richard Miller is quoted here talking about why we're doing this.

So just teaching more engineering does not make more effective engineers.

It might make them smarter, more detailed, more able to publish a research paper,

but what we really need is engineers who can go out and solve problems with other people, and that needs skillset and mindset.

So Engineering New Zealand is part of the Washington Accord.

All these skills are a critical path. Part of you being signed off as professional engineers.

And this is how we're going to go about it. So you will have heard about Systems Week,

which is the crazy sounding assessment that the year above you will have talked about where

you have this team of 30 people and you have one type week to solve this massive problem.

And when I tell other people what we're doing, they think it's crazy too.

But because it's so hard and so challenging, that's why you get to learn a lot.

And we don't just send you in at the deep end. We give you a practice.

So there will be a Systems Week project. You'll hear more about tomorrow. There's a warm up.

There'll be a team project. You'll get to know your team. You'll see how you work.

You'll see how they work. You'll see who's really annoying. You'll see who's really useful.

You'll see just how to get things done in that group of people.

And then all around those big assessments, you have got the building blocks that you need to allow you to complete the project.

So today we're talking about mindset and grit. We'll talk about systems thinking.

And then as the lectures progress, you will slowly piece together all the jigsaw pieces that you need to complete that assessment.

So the whole course is about preparing you to do a really hard thing that will teach you a lot.

So I mentioned growth mindset and fixed mindset.

These are not either or. This is a continuum.

So a fixed mindset tends to be where a lot of people start.

So by now in your careers you've decided you're pretty good at this.

You're pretty bad at that. You know what you're good at.

You know what you find really challenging, and then you've got a kind of choice which will stay with you for the rest of your life.

You can either just keep doing the things you find easy and do them well, and then go to the pub.

Or you can keep challenging yourself to learn new things.

And there's a lot of research done in business and economics and behavioural science to look at where

people sit on the spectrum of having a fixed mindset or a growth mindset or somewhere in between,

and how that correlates with how successful they are.

So I'm going to show you a little video so you can hear it from the horse's mouth.

Researcher and professor Carol Dweck uses the term mindset to describe the way people think about ability and talent.

Dweck delineates between two different mindsets that exist on a continuum.

The first is the fixed mindset, which suggests that your abilities are innate and unchangeable.

The second is a growth mindset, which views it as something you can improve through practice.

In a fixed mindset, you view failure as permanent, but with a growth mindset, you see failure as a chance to learn and even pivot.

Those with a fixed mindset are more likely to view critical feedback as a personal attack,

while those with a growth mindset will see it as a chance to improve where they can develop new systems.

With a fixed mindset, you're more likely to choose easier tasks and put in minimal effort.

After all, if talent is fixed, why bother improving? Why even try?

But with the growth mindset,

you're more likely to embrace challenging tasks and work hard to improve those with a fixed mindset are likely to give up when they face an obstacle.

Meanwhile, those with a growth mindset will new obstacles as a chance to experiment and solve problems in a fixed mindset.

The focus is on measurable accomplishments, but with a growth mindset, the focus is more on a journey of continual improvement.

With a fixed mindset, you are less likely to take creative risks.

But with a growth mindset, creative risks are simply a way to innovate and improve.

Ultimately, your mindset influences everything from creative risk taking to how you leave feedback, to whether or not you finish difficult tasks.

And in the end, it's one of the greatest factors in determining whether or not you grow and improve in your abilities.

So that's come out of Um. Business research.

Behavioural science research, like I said. It's also got a biological basis.

So the more we learn about how the brain works. And I come from a school of biological sciences.

So I hear a lot about this in my department. There's actually a physical basis for new things making you more successful.

So if you force yourself to learn new things, especially as you get older, you actually make new neural pathways.

So there's something called neuroplasticity. You might have heard about if you know anyone who's had a stroke, who's slowly recovered.

That's happening in healthy brains all the time. So if you try and do new things, your brain gets more resilient and more useful.

Now it's a bit self-help guide, cheesy in places.

Some of the stuff that you read about with growth mindset and there is obviously a limit.

So for example, when I was 14, I bought myself a pair of figure skates and I really wanted to be a figure skater.

I am possibly the most uncoordinated person I know and I never managed to achieve that.

So there is a physical limit to some of these growth mindset things.

But I'm sure I did my brain good trying and failing. And on the other hand, when I was finishing my PhD, I hated public speaking.

I couldn't think of anything worse than doing exactly what I'm doing now.

So I decided I didn't want to have an academic career. I wanted to go and do something else, and I went and did something else.

I realised that I really missed being at the university, that I really did want an academic career,

and that the public speaking thing was something I was just going to have to get over, and I did.

Hopefully I did, because I'm standing up talking to all you guys now.

And so it's not some one size fits all try and manifest the future self-help guide.

It's actually got a biological basis,

and people who've studied who is successful in their careers come back again and again and again to people who can take feedback,

learn new things, and try and improve things beyond their core skill set.

To do that, you need some grit. And this is the book that Caleb mentioned.

So there's a few things that you need. If you are going to teach yourself to do things that you find really hard.

It's interesting that talented people don't necessarily have more grit.

In fact, in some studies it's inversely related, probably because talented people have always found things easy and they haven't learnt to fail,

and they haven't come up with the kind of perseverance tools to make themselves try and do something that's difficult.

Um, so just because you're talented doesn't mean you have grit,

and some less talented people are likely to have more grit, but it's something that you can really work on.

So it's all about having passion, perseverance,

deciding what you're going to do and going for it even when it's hard and it's going to take a sustained period of time.

So Angela Duckworth has looked at this in a lot of detail in all sorts of different professional contexts,

and there's some videos on the web if you are interested and don't want to read the whole book,

but there's basically four key pillars that she's identified, and these are quite useful for you going forward.

So one is passion and interest. It's really hard to be determined about something that you are not interested in.

So as you go out of here into your career, you might want to get rich.

That might be your goal,

but you might want to get rich doing something that you're really passionate about that's really interesting to you day to day.

And then it's more likely that you're going to be able to deliver. You're going to need to practice whatever it is.

That's hard. You won't be able to do it first time. You need that patience, that resilience, that determination to keep doing it.

For many, having a sense of purpose makes a difference.

So even if the thing that you are doing day to day, you don't enjoy.

If you can see that you're moving towards a greater goal, then that might increase your grit.

And finally, a sense of hope and optimism. Sometimes things seem so hard you think you're not going to be able to get to the end of them.

But if you've got that resilience and that optimism, then you may well be able to overcome and achieve your goal anyway.

And certainly in Systems Week, we see a bit of that hope curve.

So people come in all excited and ready to go by about Wednesday afternoon.

There's a little bit of despair creeping in, and you can really start to see who's got more grit,

who's got less grit to really rally through when everyone's tired and they've missed a lot of sleep and they need to get to the end.

So there's a bit more detail on this slide about those four pillars.

Be interested in it. Keep practising. Have that sense of purpose and that sense of hope.

And the other aspect of that is how you view failure.

So for many people, failure is upsetting, damaging to their self-esteem, something that they'd rather forget about and not reflect on,

but actually thinking about why you fail and when you fail can be one of the best ways to get better professionally.

So when I first decided I wanted to go back to the university and applied for a lectureship, I failed.

I failed three times. I got it on the fourth time, and each time I learnt from the experience,

I could see where my weak spots were and I tried harder to fill those gaps and get the academic position in the end.

So wherever you picked your sales career wise, you probably won't get there first time.

And in fact, the earlier you fail, the more resilient you might end up being in the long term.

I know people who hit their first failure at kind of 45, 50, 55,

and they find it much harder than people that set ambitious goals and failed a bit earlier and bounced back.

So here's some punch lines. Perseverance. Resilience, mental toughness.

Determination will be helpful. Think about those when you're setting your goals for the course.

There's a lot of work that shows that people who can delay instant gratification in favour of long term success will succeed more.

Some of you might have heard of the Dunedin study, which looks at kids who were born.

I think it's 52 years ago now, and they've looked at them every year of their lives to see what predicted success.

One of the biggest predictions for that cohort was something called the marshmallow test,

where you take a four year old and you put them in a room with the marshmallow.

And there's a camera they don't know there's a camera there.

And the person talking to the four year old says, if you don't eat the marshmallow until I come back, you can have two.

Um, that was one of the best predictors of overall career success later in life.

Um, also a predictor of people who don't like marshmallows. But all tests have they their flaws.

Um, and it's a measure of that impulse control, that willingness to really strive for a bigger goal.

So people with high levels of grit will find solutions when challenges arrive.

And your grit test is definitely Systems Week.

So this is my last slide just to show you what I've been trying to say today.

That's your career along the x axis. How successful you are going to be along the y axis.

You're all smart cookies. You're all going to have a great career.

And what we're going to do in this course is just provide you with that development opportunity

to see if you can aim higher and to learn some extra skills so you are even more successful.

And I've left a few minutes so that there's lots of times for questions, either out loud now, or we'll stay around at the end.

And remember that first assignment is due on Monday. Thank you. There's a You actually count to ten.

