[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Can I get everyone's attention quickly, please? Hello, everyone.

Hello? Yo. Um.

We are. My name is Angus. I'm the vocal director for the engineering review.

Um. I'm Stella, I'm this year's assistant producer. Um, and we are here to promote our show.

Um, the theme this year, as you can see, is Star Wars.

Um, that is what our plot is, but we also have a bunch of other really cool departments, such as vocals, which Angus runs.

We have skits. We have dancers. We have really cool props and costumes and the dates.

Yeah, it's it's in two weeks. End of week six is when the show is.

Um, there's probably like 40 part fours, I think, in the show.

Like, if you look around the room, there's going to be wherever you look, there's going to be people involved in the show.

So you're going to know a lot of people. Um, and also the, the quicker you get in get tickets, the better seats you'll get.

Come along and support, um. The show. Yeah, it's in Sky city, so.

Which is pretty cool. Do you want me to say the system thing? Oh.

That's fine. Okay. Yeah. Thank you everyone. Thanks, guys.

I went last year. It was great. Buy a ticket if you haven't got a seat.

There are two options. Well there's three. One is, you could be sad and stand at the back.

There's plenty of seats down the front if you want to come. There's some of the edge if you're shy or there's an overflow room around the corner.

So shuffle down. So welcome everybody.

It's great to see you all here. Today. We have our guest lecture.

I've told Tom that you're always like this queuing to get in.

It's always hard to get a seat.

Tom is as well as the chief science adviser for Nima, the National Emergency Management Agency, also a lecturer at the University of Canterbury.

So he knows how tough it is to get a crowd.

I had the huge privilege, as I mentioned, on lecture three of working with Tom when I was the chief science adviser to the Prime Minister.

Tom is at the pointy end of things. So on Tuesday I told you how government works and how it sometimes doesn't work in a business as usual scenario,

trying to make sensible strategic change for the country. And I just at the very end touched on how things change in an emergency.

Tom sits in that hot seat. He only really gets activated in an emergency.

The rest of the time.

He spends a lot of time thinking about how best to do that, how to get technical information into government when the [INAUDIBLE] hits the fan.

So I'm going to hand over to Tom, also welcome some of his team from Nima.

And the final thing from me is, if you don't want to be on my LinkedIn page,

cover your face in a minute because I'm going to take a picture while you're all here. Okay.

Welcome, Tom. Oh.

Thank you so much, Juliet, for the very warm welcome. And thank you so much, everyone, for coming today.

I understand it was totally under your own choice, and that there was no requirement for you to be here.

Um, it's my huge privilege to to be here, um, presenting to you today.

Um, as Juliet said, I've been the chief science adviser for Nema or the National Emergency Management Agency for the past four years.

Um, I'm the the inaugural or the first, um, chief science advisor for for Nima.

And it really came off the back of a lot of Juliet's amazing work, uh, when she was prime minister's chief science advisor.

And that need for ensuring that we've got good science advice going into governments around big emergencies,

um, particularly at sort of strategic level, which we'll go into a bit today.

Um, what Juliet's asked me to, to cover is a bit around how science and evidence and forms the Emergency Management system in Aotearoa New Zealand.

Recognising some of the challenges of how we approach decision making under quite deep uncertainty at times,

but also in a really compressed time dimension where it can very,

very significant decisions which involve people's lives, wellbeing needed to be made under quite heavy time pressure.

And I wanted to try and explore some of the the relationship between science evidence,

public trust and and emergency response and how that that can play out in real time and explore the role of.

I've I've used the term science advisors, but I'm hoping you guys will identify with that role as being future technical experts

operating in deeply complex systems and how you're applying that technical expertise,

communicating it and, um, creating actionable advice and then spend a little bit of time at the end

reflecting on where some of the emerging risks and future challenges are coming.

Um, just so that we're all on the same page. Risk is often quite a contested term.

So the way that I use risk and the New Zealand Emergency Management System uses risk, um, as we're bringing together hazard,

which might be a process or a phenomena that could potentially cause harm or impact to society,

and we're relating it to what might be exposed, what parts of society, whether it's people, buildings, culture,

um, things that we treasure, our economy and how we relate them together through that notion of of vulnerability.

I've got young kids, so the best metaphor I could think of was like three piggies in the big Bad wolf where the big bad wolf is the hazard,

huffing and puffing, trying to blow houses down. But the three different houses made out of straw sticks and brick.

They've got different vulnerability attributes, and so they can resist the, uh, the hazard or and come through it.

What we get from when we combine all that together is potential impact. And if we've got a probability attached to it, then we have risk.

So risk being a function of of likelihood and and potential consequences in terms of setting the scene R0.

New Zealand is one of the most exposed nations on Earth to natural hazards.

We're often described as being some of the most at risk, but I think that's that's unfair.

We have amazing resilience and natural advantages here, both in terms of our how we operate as a society and what we've done to mitigate those risks.

But we are highly exposed. We sit on the boundary of two large tectonic plates, which are very active.

We have large volcanic fields. We're sitting on an active volcanic field at the moment and here in Auckland, um, and we have, uh,

exposed to ex tropical cyclones coming down from the north and big storm events coming up from the Southern Ocean,

with climate change and other drivers exacerbating some of those risks.

And I think the challenge that we've faced over the last, certainly the last decade and particularly the last five years,

is that we're really seeing the risk from natural hazards compounding and increasing our hazard prone areas,

of which much of New Zealand is, as, uh, is built around.

Um, we see those hazard events often occurring more frequently, particularly energised by that, that.

Much more energetic climate and some of those dimensions and also the choices that we are making of where we choose to build,

how we choose to live and and where we're based, and particularly the intensification of development and some of those hazard prone areas.

We see in some cases the relative vulnerability of people, property and infrastructure and other things that we treasure.

Growing in some some areas and other areas that are becoming more resilient.

But as a general trend, this seems to be what we are facing, particularly with our continued dependence on technology and essential services.

Um, it's, uh, creates challenges when we have a shock or an event which might disrupt them.

Climate change is probably one of the big drivers that we see that we are grappling with in the emergency management system.

We've seen a operational tempo of the New Zealand Emergency management system at an extraordinary, um, uh, state of the last five years.

Um, these greater frequency of events and short succession is leading to a quite a compounding effect.

And if we cast our minds back over the last five years, we think of, um, the Covid 19 pandemic.

Large storm events, um, compounding. And it's been quite a challenging period for New Zealand and New Zealand.

The way that we've often, or at least traditionally managed our natural hazard risks has been through risk transfer.

So we're one of the rare nation state which is heavily reliant on insurance for transferring our risks.

We have the wonderful Natural Hazards Commission, formerly known as Earthquake Commission,

and what we call very high penetration of insurance across um homes and businesses throughout New Zealand.

And there's been quite a heavy reliance on insurance as a way to manage what those risks might be,

so that when we have an event, we've got capital that can come back in and and affect it.

But these compounding events are putting pressure on those traditional mechanisms.

And so there's much greater need perhaps to focus on risk reduction.

And when risk reduction like land use planning controls, building controls or building codes, etc. aren't working as hoped.

As the residual risk gets mopped up by the emergency management system during response and into recovery,

and the nature and pressure of that is has been quite unsustainable. I think of the last decade.

Something like 97% of central government expenditure has been focussed either on response and recovery,

rather than on explicitly on risk reduction initiatives,

which is a skew that simply Treasury and other central government agencies are keen to address.

This is an infographic that Nema has produced.

We may Juliet may have covered this last week or earlier in the week, where government agencies produce briefings for incoming ministers,

which are a wonderful resource of finding out how a particular agency views their their area or their field,

and what some of the issues and challenges and pressures that they're seeing.

So if you're interested in this stuff, check out some of the beams as they call beams briefing for incoming minister.

They're quite, quite a useful resource. But what this plot's showing is the number of states of emergency that have been declared over the last 18

years and has colour coded around what the different causes or reasons for those states of emergencies.

There's two types. There's local states of emergency and then national states of emergency, of which we've only had a couple.

Oh cool. My bit quiet. It's not normally critiqued for that.

Okay, good. How's that? Okay. So what we're seeing here is a much higher frequency of states of emergency declared.

Um, I wanted to ask a question. Of what? What do you think's been the driver of that increase in this?

The number of states of emergency. By climate change?

Yeah, we definitely have seen an increase in some of the storm events that we're seeing.

But as Julie would have said, sometimes is multiple factors which will lead to these.

So that's one. Yep. Maybe we can adjust. We notice them more.

We have better detection. Yep. Better detection. Yeah that's probably a fair fear.

So I'm just gonna unpack that further. Yeah. Population growth.

Yeah. But more more more exposure perhaps more interest around what some of those consequences would be.

What else might be another factor that's leading to a larger number of states of emergency being declared.

Yep. Yeah. Nice.

So it's been some change in how we're perceiving this.

So one of the areas that we've been directed around to look at is to have a much greater readiness and response posture.

So there's been a lot more willingness to declare a state of emergency, to use it as a way to enhance the quality of the response,

to ensure that the resources and different things that government and other agencies can deploy to emergency response.

But they're also really powerful from a social science perspective of motivating communities.

If there's something that's that's occurring, it brings a sort of focusing effect, if you will.

So we've we've seen that increased tempo and the increased activity that's occurring there.

These are some of the main large events which have dominated things across the Canterbury earthquake sequence back in 2011,

with the Kokoda earthquake in 2017. Covid 19 pandemic in 2020, which sort of extended on a bit.

And then the North Island severe weather events where Auckland had the anniversary weekend floods,

and then sort of almost immediately afterwards, the Cyclone Gabrielle, which affected the Upper East part of the North Island.

Within all of this,

there's been a number of reviews and inquiries around how New Zealand's emergency management systems should be positioned and and developed,

so those are significant moments there as well. So to set the scene, what is the New Zealand Emergency Management system?

It's a system set up a number of subsystems. They're all interconnected across things like infrastructure and biosecurity etc.

it all comes together as a unified system which is looking to manage an emergency.

The way we try and frame that is looking at at across what we call the four Rs,

we have risk reduction where we're trying to reduce the um, in a structural sense or a long term sense what the potential risks might be.

Sometimes that's also used with the term resilience. And there's readiness, which is the phase where you might be preparing for emergencies.

This might be things like doing practice evacuation drills for tsunami or understanding what your early warning system might look like.

And then we have response, which is when we're responding to an emergency event, and then we go into the recovery phase.

And then theoretically, the theory here is that they form a continuous cycle of continuously improving and and building resilience across it.

Across all of those different aspects of the four Rs. The system's purpose overall is to increase resilience for you and for New Zealand society.

Um, and that ability to, uh, not just absorb and cope with events, but hopefully to thrive as we know that we are highly exposed to these risks.

Um, the and a huge focus of the emergency management system is to be focussed around empowering communities

and households to be able to cope and support themselves as much as possible without knowing what to do.

Having the means and the knowledge of how to how to approach it. And underpinned by these these perspectives here.

One of the features of the emergency management system is that we have what's called a devolved model,

where much of the actual, uh, activity in terms of emergency management is undertaken at regional and local levels.

We have 16 civil, defence and emergency management groups across the country, or KDM if you like,

and working in partnership with each other and with Nema as the national agency which coordinates and supports that, uh, that um that system.

Iwi Maori really important.

In fact critical partners to the emergency management system in so many ways and lots of connections across into other subsystems and and other areas.

Um, these are some of the subsystems that that, uh, also exist within that wider system.

And the interest for us is not just here in New Zealand, but also out into what are called the the realm countries.

Um, so some of our Pacific Island, um, partners, such as the Cook Islands and then of course, into the wider Pacific environment.

And one of the colleagues here from the Nima international team is really Jose, who's really heavily embedded within that.

But the general mantra here is to have a locally led approach to emergency management, regionally coordinated and nationally enabled.

And so colleagues, myself from Nima, we sit in that national level where we're trying to enable and support as much as possible.

So with that, as a sort of scene setter, I thought it's probably high time to introduce who I am.

So my role as chief science advisor is to provide at a strategic level or sort of right under the lens of, of central government,

as much scientific advice and evidence base for how we should be going approaching our emergency management activities.

And a lot of my role tends to be around understanding risk and what can we do about it,

both in a crisis event or an emergency event and or preparing for it?

Um, one of the the ways that, um, the friendlier colleagues within email to describe me as sometimes a bit like science theory,

where you might be floating around the agency, sprinkling a bit of science dust, um, where it might be necessary.

Um, but I tend to think of myself at times as almost like a plumber where you're trying to work out what's the problem?

Where do we diagnose that in the system? What needs to be connected,

unblocked or rerouted so that that information or knowledge or science advice can be communicated in such a way that it's appropriate?

And maybe there's a translational fact where the that knowledge needs to be transformed.

I'm very keen not to go down the wastewater treatment a metaphor there, but hopefully you can draw some of those conclusions.

And then one of my very cheeky X graduate students, because I'm coming from, uh, as being an academic who is now based in Neiva,

these guys all know Alice Evans is described as a seagull, where sometimes you just fly in to a particular area.

There might be something of interest. Squawk. Flap, defecate and then fly off again and hope for the best.

But of any of those rolls, they do describe a bit of that,

of a lot of what I'm trying to do is provide those connections across the science emergency management system boundary and working at that interface,

but also being in a way where you're communicating with some of the really key officials,

such as the national controller, the chief executive, and often spend a lot of time briefing ministers.

And when it's really bad, sometimes the prime minister.

One of the examples that I wanted to give you for a start, was one of the first major roles that I had when coming into Nema,

which was not to manage a real world crisis or emergency.

But when we were doing work around looking at what might catastrophic planning for RLC or New Zealand look like?

So one of the lessons that we had had from overseas and back in 2022,

when we were coming out of the the Covid pandemic was to think around what if we have an emergency?

And then if we have a disaster where we start to see society or at least parts of society, overwhelmed.

But what if we get to being a catastrophe,

where we start to see the fundamental building blocks or attributes of a functioning government and functioning society,

functioning economy start to collapse? And we've never really experienced that in the last 100 or so years here in New Zealand.

But perhaps analogies would be where you might draw things into failed states,

where often armed conflict might might collapse a nation state and, and cause some of those challenges.

But we're well aware that New Zealand has a number of different risks which could lead to this.

So one of the tasks that Nemo got given in 2022 and looked into was to look at what might catastrophic planning for government look like.

And so we were looking overseas and domestically, but particularly overseas, what others had done,

and the key lessons was the inability or it's really challenging to scale up your

existing arrangements to deal with something that's of catastrophic nature,

and to use that evidence base of where we've seen nation states that we might find ourselves similar to or useful to look to those,

those experiences of what we can draw in. But the key lesson that we had had was that at these types,

planning for these types of events don't be limited by your current thinking or what you can conceptualise.

So ensuring that we had a credible scientific grounding around what is possible in terms of some of the risks that we are faced with,

with one of the areas that I got tasked to have a look at.

So we drew from some of the work across from,

from the United States around the failure of imagination to conceptualise that there could be a terrorist attacks such as nine over 11,

despite there being quite a lot of evidence that that could potentially happen.

And in the case of Hurricane Katrina back in 2005, the failure of an initiative of having a fairly clear understanding of what might be in play,

but not being able to affect the planning or the actual action. So we were very mindful of some of those,

those case studies there where we determined would be a way forward to plan around such a thing like this, is to have a scenario.

Obviously, we've got heaps of different probabilistic options that we could look at of earthquakes and,

um, geopolitical threats that we could look at.

But having a single scenario, which was determined to be a maximum credible event that we could plan around,

was one that was, uh, thought to be quite, quite a useful way to go.

So the question I got asked was was which scenario and what might maximum credible look like?

So we worked with um, convened some of New Zealand's leading, uh, risk scientists, and we determined that the Korangi subduction zone,

um, with its earthquake and consequential tsunami would be a useful, credible event.

Which, um, was not just that. It's probably one of our largest risks in terms of threat to life and impacts the economy and other areas.

But it was also one that at the time was easy or easy for perhaps the planners and some of the other officials to conceptualise,

because there had been a bit of experience with earthquakes in the preceding five or so years before.

But one of the things that we found was really important was to not just understand what the earthquake could be,

but to be able to have a really effective way to communicate what this risk might look like.

So some of these visualisations from Brendan Bradley and the seismic team,

which involved some of the your University of Auckland geotechnical and earthquake engineers,

um, was a really powerful way to visualise what might a magnitude 9.1 earthquake look like on the subduction margin.

So what we have here is a physics based simulation where the seismic waves that are

being generated by this fault and zipping or rupturing are being visualised by this,

this vertical exaggeration, exaggeration of the of the waves.

For those that are many of the officials that were planning for this who were based in Wellington,

so they're sort of seeing what that looks like, but you can start to see what that impact might be around.

Um, uh, across the country as that visualisation of the, of the shaking moves across the North Island,

across the South Island, and you can really get that sense of how the,

the waves stack up as that rupture front progresses, with the seismic waves moving at about the same speed as the as the rupture scenario.

So this was a really good hook. And I can see already within the the lecture theatre, you've all kind of gone a little bit more quiet.

You're sort of having a look at seeing what's going on here.

The other part of the scenario that we were keen to look at was not just the very intense ground shaking that we would likely see from this,

this event across a large portion of the North Island, but also the tsunami that would likely be produced.

And so where we have a subduction earthquake, where we've got the fault rupture happening under sea and we've got displacement of the seafloor,

and is the likelihood that we would see a large tsunami wave being produced.

And so this imagery from Japan in 2011 is really analogous to what we might experience on the Wairarapa,

Hawke's Bay and Tirupati coasts off the east coast of the North Island.

And what was really a useful demonstration here was showing it's not just about the the water and the waves,

but you're seeing the, the long period of the wave that's coming in and the amount of debris that it's picking up,

which makes it so much more understandable as to why there might be high damage and what that,

um, the potential for casualties could be if there's not sufficient evacuations.

So coupled with that was a really neat, um, rapid simulation that, uh,

colleagues from GNS or Natural Sciences did of simulating what that wave would look like.

And for those of you that have got keen eyes, see, in the top right there,

there's a little timestamp of how that wave is progressing as it's produced and how it affects the New Zealand coastline.

Now I'll just go back to the beginning and run it again where we can see the, uh, sorry.

Excuse me. So if we run that again as my computer catches up, what I want you to watch for is the timestamp up in the top right corner here,

and watch just how close or how quickly that wave reaches the eastern coast of the North Island.

We're at ten minutes here. Wellington has just been affected. Wairarapa.

We're at 20 minutes now. And Tai Rafferty, Gisborne just been affected.

And that waves starting to enter into Hawke's Bay and at about 45 to 50 minutes.

Napier and Hastings inundated with a 10 to 12 metre tsunami wave.

We see that wave now wrap around Bay of plenty, Wellington Harbour and coming into Auckland.

So you can start to see that compound or excuse me, that cascading hazard that's starting to be produced.

But what really was able to take that next step in terms of really activating the system

around being able to plan for this was then to use those ground shaking and then what the,

uh, consequential effects in terms of building damage and casualties that might be produced there,

but also if we had different evacuation scenarios for an event like this, what the expected casualty burden could potentially be and appreciate.

These are quite confronting numbers, but a really useful, um,

metric that was used to influence why we should plan for this and to really motivate a lot of not just within Nima,

but many other agencies to support this catastrophic planning process.

And a key lesson from it all really easily or clearly demonstrated with the casualty numbers here was

assuming that we have about 70% evacuation compliance of people being able to move out of evacuation zones.

This was the estimated casualties that would be produced.

That 70% number comes from social science of looking at how many communities or percentage of communities that have evacuated,

um, following recent tsunami warnings across New Zealand.

So we were reasonably comfortable with that number.

But if we drop that number away or assume that no one evacuated from that event and see the injuries increase a little bit,

but the fatalities markedly increase. And that just just really points to how lethal being trapped in tsunami waters potentially can be.

So they said important implications for the health system.

But also if we were seeing successful evacuations, over 400,000 people are in activated tsunami evacuation zones needing to move out.

And after 24 hours, we'd expect over 100,000 people still displaced, with 30,000 residential homes likely to be damaged from this type of event,

bringing into built environments and really high numbers of potential damage to to that area as well.

That's just the the vertical infrastructure from the shaking and tsunami.

So it gave us a bit of a sense of what the what a maximum credible event could look like and what we could be planning around for.

And that led to a lot of curiosity from some of our senior officials, some other chief executives and ministers around.

What are some of the other potential scenarios that we have that we might need to be considering?

So we pulled together this table of different modelled risks of some of our national, nationally significant risks.

And you'll see they're up at the top as the Auckland volcanic field of potential eruption there.

And just the simple table of looking at the relative or the estimated likelihood

and the potential consequences has been a very powerful way to look at how

some of these different scenarios that we might need to be looking for in that

scenario that I just ran you through was I've just highlighted an orange here.

And so just noting that whilst only 1% chance in the next 50 years of occurring,

it's certainly at the upper end of what the potential consequences could be.

Um, and just again, trying to communicate the risk in such a way that can make meaning for, again,

planners or senior officials or ministers, is to relate this back to real world events that we've seen.

So the equivalent of a Cyclone Gabrielle event, the big storm that we saw in 2023,

it's about an 80% chance of occurring if there's no change in climate in the next 50 years.

The Kokoda earthquake and the the day before that earthquake occurred, there was about a 1.7% chance of it occurring in the next 50 years.

And the Canterbury earthquake sequence, the probability of it occurring the day prior to it happening, was less than 1%.

So the point here is that these rare events do happen.

We should be preparing for them, because that's part of what living here in Aotearoa is all about.

And so just nice, simple metrics that can tell a powerful tale have been a really important part of of the journey, at least that I've been part of.

And then I think, just hopefully, to riff off what Juliet point from,

from your last lecture, I'm trying to think of how might this be interesting to a minister?

What if we have a brand new minister of Emergency Management?

Well, of all of these scenarios on this table, what's the cumulative probability of it occurring and the electoral term?

Or what if they get re-elected and they're the minister for two electoral cycles over six years,

and then over the next 50 years, something like this is almost certain.

So again, it was just ways to try and grab the audience and, um, hopefully get them engaged on what might be,

um, some of the key things that they need to be responsible for.

So changing gears a little bit, I want to look at science advice during crisis events.

And I understand my lecture is setting you up for your systems week.

So I've been sworn to secrecy. But do take note of this.

But one of the points that, um, I think, uh, your role when you're going out into the world, when you're a professional engineer or whatever,

it is a career that you're looking to get into is you're going to have an amazing technical ability that very small parts of the population will have,

and being able to communicate that in an effective way to inform other very intelligent,

but maybe non-expert people in your field will be a key skill and attribute that you want to be looking to develop.

And one of the areas that sequential reviews and inquiries into large disasters and emergencies, which haven't gone so well in New Zealand,

has noted that often we've had quite good science input and forecasting and even understanding that a hazard or risk might be there.

But how that then becomes operationalised or translated into a way that's actionable policy or practice that can be done.

And so that's one of the parts I wanted to explore here, particularly in an emergency or a crisis context.

And the best originally when I was trying to conceptualise what this might look like, as I was thinking,

it's almost like a sausage factory where there's a whole bunch of stuff going in and creating a sausage.

But apparently the more politically correct way to do this is to bake a loaf of bread.

So one of the ways we want to think here is you've got data from engineering domain or science domain or whatever it might be,

and then you're analysing it, you're adding value and creating a product which would be trying to help with decision making.

And in this case you might have a loaf of bread. But when we're in that operational context, there might be different things that we need.

We might need a sub or we might need a some toast,

or we might need something where we need a gluten free option for whatever the case might be for making the decision.

And the analogy I've used here is we might need something different for public messaging compared with contingency planning,

compared with national warnings, or even for governance decisions.

So the area that that Juliet and myself and others often occupy is how do we use that,

that loaf of bread or bake a different loaf of bread and pull it with different fillings to make it as useful as possible for making good quality,

evidence based decisions in a manner that's timely and and effective.

So one of the examples I think Juliet touched on was with the faculty.

White Islands Disaster or tragedy in 2019, where Juliet was heavily involved in the crisis response of how to manage that event.

And one of the things I was involved in prior to joining Nema was as part of the New Zealand Volcano Science Advisory Panel,

providing support with media and briefings and things like that.

An event like this creates a huge, um, focusing effect for the government because it's been such a tragic and shocking,

um, and, uh, just awful, um, uh, event that has occurred.

And so there has been a really heightened sense of how we should be managing that risk and a deeply challenging, um,

legislative and, uh, environment with lots of different, um, complexities with it being a privately owned offshore volcanic island.

But one of the areas we've been to work around is supporting the Bay of Plenty Civil Defence and

Emergency management group with leveraging national volcano science advice for their planning,

also for their elected members. And in 2025.

Last year we were looking at should we be returning to the island to reinstall volcanic monitoring equipment,

particularly for the benefit of aviation, maritime, and if there was ever an appetite for resumption of potential touristic activities there?

And so one of the things that I was really heavily involved in was how do we undertake a structured, scientific,

peer of peer reviewed risk assessment of what the likely risks of returning to the island and then the eventual benefits of that?

And I understand you've been doing a lot of work around business cases and cost benefit analysis,

and that was exactly what we were exploring there of the different trade offs that might be in play.

Um, but sadly, because we have a coronial inquiry underway on faculty, I can't speak to much more to that,

but I just want to create a connection to what Julia had covered before.

But I thought one of the other areas that might be of interest is the crisis that you may never have heard about,

which was the 2022 to 2023 Taupo volcanic unrest event.

So Taupo volcano in the central North Island is known as a super volcano.

And this is a imagery or sorry, a visualisation of the um last eruption from Taupo about 1800 years ago.

So I just tried to pull that forward of it. Nope. Sorry.

Sorry. It's not gonna let me do it, but the Taupo volcano is well renowned for having, um, about 29 eruptions over the last 26,000 years.

And two of them were extremely large. One of the really large ones was only 1800 years ago.

It was devastated the central North Island area, and I think there were records and Chinese,

um, uh, um, scriptures or uh, um, uh, histories of seeing a change in the climate and,

uh, seeing a lot of dust and incredible sunsets at the time, which would have probably been,

um, volcanic ash that had been erupted from the Taupo volcano. So one of the things that, uh,

we faced in sort of mid to late 2022 was all of a sudden we saw an increase in earthquake activity underneath Taupo volcano.

And so this plot here that I'm showing you is the number of earthquake events per week on the vertical axis and then time on the horizontal axis.

So during period A of the first part of 2022, um, we had very, very low number of earthquakes under Taupo Volcano.

But then around about May, we started seeing an increase, and the increased earthquakes also were accompanied by uplift,

where we saw the lake rising up and the surrounding land expanding and rifting apart.

And so this is not uncommon for a volcano like Taupo to have these, what are called volcanic unrest periods.

But the socio political context that we were operating in was one we were only 2 or 3 years after the featured eruption.

We had the same government in an office, and there was extremely high sensitivity around volcanic risk,

and particularly if there was any further volcanic crises. So what happened through this period?

Oh, sorry. The other important piece of the puzzle was junior science at the time.

They're now being merged into Earth Sciences New Zealand.

They had had a lot of critique and review around their role and the faculty disaster around what sort of science advice they had provided.

And they were um, uh, had been subject to judicial proceedings.

So it was quite a challenging context with that all all occurring.

So the way that New Zealand manages, uh, these types of events is they have what's called the volcano alert level.

So Taupo is usually at zero. But for the first time ever, Genius Science raised the volcano alert level to one for Taupo volcano.

And there was huge, um, stress and concern around how that might go down,

particularly in the socio political context, because we have a lot of examples from overseas where,

um, in or ineffectively communicating, um, a reawakening volcano has led to, um, some really unfortunate outcomes, like, uh, um, large evacuations.

Um, outrage and frustration around and loss of trust with scientific authorities and emergency management authorities.

So they made the call, particularly after a spike of earthquakes in September, to raise the alert level to one.

They did a really good job of communicating with Nema and other agencies around why they were doing that,

and then somewhat difficult in a difficult manner for,

um, their science agency, as those earthquakes then tailed away and the volcano went, went quiet or much quieter and so much fewer earthquakes.

We had a, um, once we got into late 2022, that there was a magnitude 5.7 earthquake under Taupo and also with 18cm of uplift,

which in a volcano context is quite, quite significant.

So it's a really difficult period for the science agency.

But also, what should government be doing here? Um, we've got this heightened awareness around the volcano and there was a lot of interest

from the Minister of Finance of what that might mean for critical infrastructure.

And the Prime Minister at the time was was certainly very attuned to it as, as well.

So Juliet and I were in pretty frequent contact with us.

And then after that big spike in activity is that we had declining activity again through early 2023 and it all falling away.

But during that time, we had a very challenging environment of being able to communicate.

What did this mean for communities and for the regions around it, and for what should the government be trying to do?

We're also coming out of the Covid 19 pandemic, and so it was a complicated situation.

So there's a lot of desire around what are the national warnings that we should be doing, how much or how little should be being prepared.

The social licence around what governments could be communicating was starting to to fray a little bit after the pandemic experience.

There was a lot of regional impacts, planning that was going on and public communications for for reinsurance.

And so the experience that we had through this time was that we weren't quite getting the

science advice that we really wanted and a format that we could communicate effectively,

particularly with ministers and with other senior officials who were juggling multiple issues as, as I've covered.

So in the end, one of the first things that one of the big calls I first made as chief science

adviser was to commission genius to change the way that they were communicating.

And we ended up asking for much more of a scenario based approach we were exploring

what are the total range of different outcomes that we could see from this event,

with the volcano most likely staying in an unrest state and then at just going back to sleep,

but all the way through to what minor eruptions could be all through to catastrophic eruptions.

We couldn't rule any of them out. Um, the the range of outcomes was was challenging to communicate,

but the conceptualisation that many people had that perhaps weren't expert volcanologists

was it was either going to be a catastrophic eruption or something that they,

um, couldn't, uh, were less familiar with.

So the way we tried to approach it was really explaining what those different

likelihoods of these different scenarios could be of the different types of unrest.

And if there was to be an eruption, just how unlikely it was.

But but not not zero.

And what we should and could be planning for coupled with that was what are the potential consequences that could, uh, could potentially manifest.

And so one of the areas, after quite a difficult couple of weeks of,

of trying to work through this and, and explain it, we came up with this, this table,

and I presented it to the director of Civil Defence and emergency management at the time,

who is a guy called Gary Knowles, who's a real character, great, great guy, but a real character.

And, uh, after all the stress and anxiety of how we're communicating this effectively.

And Gary just said, oh great, Tom, that looks really simple. No dramas.

And I thought at that point, oh, we've, we've, we've probably on the right track here where he was reassured.

He felt like he had a good, good sense of what the problems were and that he was able to digest it and make, make good decisions.

So one of the areas that we've been trying to sort of build a bit of a theme around here is what that science policy boundary might look like.

One of the ways that I've found quite useful to to theorise or conceptualise in my mind is this boundary management theory,

which is a way to think about it. So across on the policy or practice domain, what we're really driving for is access to relevant knowledge.

And so we can make good decisions quickly and often that the demands can be at times quite simple but usually quite applied science or engineering,

usually trying to bring things together.

It's quite demand driven, usually interdisciplinary, but very big pressures around that time demand, and it needs to be in a very timely process.

Whereas perhaps over on the science and, and perhaps more research side of engineering is that usually credibility is the large driver.

That's, that is motivating many people dealing with uncertain and often quite complex information,

which is quite basic science and more supply driven. Um, it usually takes over a much longer term.

And but that hybrid zone demands that what we call legitimacy need to have that balance of both sides, um, having that credibility come in,

but so that it's relevant often that involves a lot of compromise,

thinking around what the inclusive way that we want to bring these things together and ensure that it's highly transparent.

And these are principles that have worked really, really well. Just checking for time how I'm doing.

So the last things I wanted to cover was the the North Ireland severe weather events, which were, um,

a very challenging time for the nation where we saw huge impacts across the northern and eastern parts of and central parts of the North Island.

Um, rather than that type of scene. What I was mostly working on was this scene, which is the National Crisis Management Centre,

which sits underneath the beehive, and a what's affectionately known as the bunker.

So this is where all of the national agencies are coming together to try and coordinate support, to get out into the regions and at local level.

One of the areas that we we really determined from that was the need for a much more structured

approach around how we're providing science advice and technical advice in an emergency context.

So the lessons that came out from that and other events was to stand up a science desk,

which provides a coordination function from the science system into the emergency management system in a transparent and and structured manner,

and to expand the different science advisory panels which we use, which please don't be put off by them.

We called science panels. There's a large number of engineers that sit on these these panels as well.

The idea here is that they provide an efficient and effective mechanism for getting access to the best technical information that we might require,

both in business as usual times and during emergencies.

So the different panels that we have sit in the middle of this diagram here, but I just wanted to show you how these will work in practice.

We're out on the left here.

We have the what we call the natural hazard monitoring and forecasting agencies so that we have GEOnet and the National Geo Hazard Monitoring Centre,

which is telling us I have tsunamis or volcanic eruptions or earthquakes. We have MetService, which is providing those forecasts.

And we also have space weather coming in too. And that's the operational arm of the science coming into our Mars centre, which is the monitoring,

alerting reporting centre and a major event that's coming into the science desk within the CMC.

But we also have these science panels, which provide and slightly slower time deep expert advice,

both during crises but also for longer term resilience activities.

And we draw from different aspects across the system too. So an example here of one of our science panels in action for Space Weather.

We've got different industry experts from Transpower, academics and Nema staff all coming together.

So to bring this all together as sort of some final thoughts.

So one of the areas that really underpins a lot of the work that we do is mindful that disaster risk is increasing with a number of drivers for that.

And some of the decisions that we make are increasing that risk of things that we have choices around.

So I think the key thing is both understanding what our risks might be is critical and all their complexity.

But perhaps most essential going forward is how do we reduce those risks as the key priority across different systems the tools,

knowledge and planning, and how do we engage and influence and empower communities with that right knowledge and

engaging those science and technical partners really key part of that investing in the future.

The final thoughts, perhaps, for you to ruminate on as you proceed with your careers?

You're very exciting time of your lives as to where you're going next,

but that need for rapids and timely access to quality technical information is really,

um, only increasing the emerging challenges that we face around AI and climate myths and disinformation and the reducing trust in institutions is key.

Um, and how we might leverage some of that is important. But if I could leave you with these four points here of the skills for pets,

what I would say is very much needed for, um, coming through to operate in, uh,

the emergency management or whatever particular technical fields you're looking for is

to be comfortable across that hybrid skill set of both using your technical knowledge,

understanding what environment it might be receiving in policy, and being able to be a very strong and effective communicator,

having that institutional independence of where you're able to provide that technical information without being exposed to political or other aspects,

but still, having that access into the decision making areas is important.

Drawing that evidence from across academia, industry, government, really important ability to synthesise and integrate and I guess less in my world.

But I would imagine in yours too, is that capability to operate under high uncertainty and often in an urgent context are good skills to to develop.

And I understand you've got some things coming which will be looking at that.

Thank you so much for your time today. Um, really do appreciate it.

Happy to take any questions. Okay.

