[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Good morning everyone. I hope you had a great weekend.

Yes or no. Yeah, I assume that some of you might be working as well.

So, um. Either it was a little creative or it was joyful.

All right. So this is going to be the last week with four lectures or two lectures.

Um, this one is going to be about assignment two and, uh, risks involved in your project team work.

So these are the two things that we are going to focus.

You already know that. Assignment two it has a reflection element, um,

where you are asked to reflect on your previous experience rounds of development and apply the knowledge around the AGI and scrum, uh, framework.

Uh, who that experience or kind of relating your current knowledge with your previous experiences and then writing reflections,

um, as your submissions. So, uh, talking about reflection, there are some formal models that you can utilise in order to write your reflections.

You need not do that.

Um, and we are not going to mock you against these models, but here is some knowledge that will definitely help you in writing your reflections.

So this document is available from modules the module one and two under module one and two.

So there are many such models of infection right with this document has been sourced from physiotherapy in New Zealand.

Uh, because really reflection is a kind of topic that is needed in all the fields.

And most of these models are like kind of applicable regardless of those fields.

So here are a few that are more relevant to us, especially the Gibbs and Jones model as well as Coles.

This, uh, fourth one is not that applicable or still, uh,

you would need to dig deeper if you want to gain more knowledge and want to find if it is applicable to your specific situation or not.

So talking about the Gibbs model. So I assume that you already know.

What do you mean by reflection? You, uh, you ought to do it.

And if you are not doing it, then there is a high chance that we won't improve our processes,

whether these are educational processes, your work processes, your US life processes.

So action is very, very important if you want to improve.

And it is also one of the most important principles of agile software development processes too.

Because we keep on focusing on improving our development steps and the overall process.

So when we say reflection, a reflection is a conscious exploration of an experience.

So in the past, what you have gone through, whether it is your personal life or your work life,

and then learning from those experiences and applying them to your future situations, we all generally know about this.

So the target here is to learn from the past.

Then apply your knowledge in the present so that you have a better future.

So the Gibbs reflective cycle. Is all about these steps.

Here we are basically first looking at what has happened.

So for example, if you're ask is, uh, to go home and do some online shopping, you might be doing that shopping.

So what has happened is you have tried to pick an item and you are currently trying to buy it.

You search for it and now you're trying to buy it.

Then your feelings. What were you thinking during that process?

So you might be thinking that I want to grab this specific product online, and or you look for it online and you go to that page and use that order.

And then evaluation what was good and bad about experience.

So you purchase that item, that item arrives and then you evaluate how the item or what what is the quality of that item,

and what was the quality of the process of placing an order.

So your overall experience wasn't good or bad.

What sense can you make of the situation and how you will do your analysis?

For example, you had purchased something from somewhere else last month as well,

so that was your past experience and now you are trying to compare it with your current experience and try to an analysis.

But, uh, in comparison to that previous experience, this experience was better or not.

And then what else could you have done? So any areas of improvements that you want to do?

Maybe you'll say that I won't buy from this site in future.

Or maybe you you want to do it. And then further on you you'll have an action plan for future based on that experience.

So this was a very, um, day to day routine life example where you buy something,

but when you are thinking about software development or you're trying to manufacture something,

build something, then it is going to be a diff, a slightly different approach, because you might be doing that for someone else.

So the ultimate product that you are going to come up with might be for someone else.

And so that someone else might be important in deciding what is good and what is bad.

And that will play a role in what you do in future or how you how you build your product in future.

Now when when we talk about, uh, from the vigil process, mortals, we know that we do reflect a lot.

And one major area, one major event where we do it is sprint retrospective.

After each sprint, the team retrospect about what went right, what went wrong, as well as sprint planning.

So these two events would have that reflection,

but it will certainly be a level reflection where you will be expected to keep on doing individual reflection as you go.

So that must always carry on. So that is the Gibbs reflective cycle.

So the primary goal here is when you reflect have a systematic approach to reflection.

So when you are attempting your assignment two,

you may look at one of these modules and decide to follow one of these modules for writing your reflection submissions.

And if you do that, then and do refer to them in your words on missions that I did follow the specific, uh, reflection or.

Now the key elements of Gibbs reflective cycle as were, are shown here.

Here is a little, uh, description for those, along with some example questions.

For example, for analysis part, I'm picking the most important one here.

What sense can you make of the situation. How do past experience compare with this.

Which is also asked where you are in assignment two?

How does theory or evidence for this? And how did you involve, uh, how did your involvement affect an outcome?

So that analysis part is what is being asked in assignment two.

Right. Of course, you need to include the other elements, because when you go to the past experience, you will also,

for example, talk about the feelings around that past experience and then your evaluation and so on.

I repeat that in assignment two,

you are asked to apply the knowledge that you have gained around the dry land from who your previous project experience.

Uh, similarly, John's model of structured reflection.

Now, uh, you'll then you'll go through these models in your own time.

You'll realise that more or less they are talking about similar aspects, because all the models will have,

uh, a step that will ask you to think about past, and then it will ask you to apply that knowledge in future.

So, for example, John's model, it suggests you to look in words.

That is, consider your own thoughts and feelings. And then look outwards.

So look inwards and look outwards. Like considering the actual incident or situation as uh, things like your actions in the situations and so on.

Often in the in the undergraduate courses. We do not talk much about this factor, but when we get to the higher stages of degrees programs.

It becomes important. And you for the rest of the life you are going to fight in this area within yourself.

No question about it. During your careers, at every stage you are going to have questions which are ethical in nature and the way the world works.

There will be situations when you do not want to do something because it is not ethically correct, but because it is happening.

Everyone is doing that. You, um, you know, got to do it now.

What do you decide in that situation will be very important as a software developer as well.

For example, I'm just giving you a little example because that was part of my, um, I just hosted.

I was supervising like, uh, around eight, nine years back.

It was around the energy efficiency of Earth systems.

When we are coding, we are not thinking about how energy efficient is our code going to be.

Uh, what does that mean? That means how much, uh, CPU our it is going to, um, incur.

And how will it ultimately act?

For example, the carbon footprints. So you need to kind of.

So it is a research that tries to relate the development practices with the energy efficiency and the impact on the planet.

So if you think ethically when you are coding, if you are writing a complex piece of code and you have your team has, um.

Accepted that complex piece of code, or it could be easily simplified.

You need to think some time to think ethically about whether to go with that complex piece or not, or make it simpler.

Now, there are so many factors involved here. From the outset, the biggest factor is time, and you have to go with your team.

You have the next tasks at hand. So whether you you accept that argument that is going within yourself or not, it will be an ethical question.

So this is just one example.

I'm sure you are going to face many others and you'll be working in even, even in your student projects within a team of eight people.

So try to make genuine decisions in those situations.

So it is about John's model is about describe the experience, then reflect and look at the unsung factors.

Think about it. Have been dealt better or not.

And what have you learned? Now, this also means that there needs to be a continuous review of what you are doing all the time.

I'm I'm not. I don't think it is practical in the real life because there are many things that we do daily, but we do not reflect upon them.

Right for example if you. So if you are driving and the light has gone, the traffic light has gone yellow.

The normal observation is like there will be a 5,050% chance that the driver will stop.

Right. So how many of us actually reflect on this aspect after reaching home?

So we do not. Do not think about everything. Right.

At least while developing software applications, because you are working professionally and you are working in a team,

you have responsibilities towards that team and the product.

Make sure that there is a continuous review of your practices, and the whole team will be responsible for that as well.

For example. Do you know? I hope you have heard X.

E extreme programming.

Extreme programming is an agile software development methodology that has that comprises around 10 to 15 good development practices.

Uh, some of them very well-known, you know, about is driven development.

I hope you have at least heard about it. You are programming continuous integration, refactoring.

So all these, uh, practices have actually formally, uh, come from extreme programming.

Now, why is it called extreme programming is interesting because it x it recommends that whatever

good practices are implemented in the traditional software development methodologies.

We use them and we use them in an extreme manner.

For example, if if the traditional development has a good practice of code review, reviewing code, or regularly, or maybe every day,

or after every sprint or every development cycle,

Extreme programming will recommend that use here programming so that the code review can be done continuously all the time.

Because the concept of pure programming is that one of the developer is actually coding, and the other is keeping on reviewing what they are doing.

So that means it is kind of continuous a reflection as well.

Right. So the details of of the steps.

Then the third one is called Learning cycle. This is the last one that I'll take.

You can look at those in your own time. Now, the number of steps that it recommends are just for.

And again, when you look at it, you'll see that more or less these models are very similar.

So. What you can do is you can also pick a few things from this model, a few things from that model, and then apply them as a unique or custom model.

All lifecycle has. It works around making sense.

Of your art experiences and then learning from it.

And then whatever you do in future, then again, of making sense of what you have done and how that is going to impact your overall performance.

But the primary goal, the primary area where it differs from the others, is drawing generalisations.

Which means, for example, if I a you, for example, you went through your software project in a specific way and based on your experiences,

you say that, okay, the requirements are gathered in this specific way.

Now for gathering the requirements.

There are some good experiences and there are some bad experiences that you then not.

You then see that okay, am I good experiences?

If I compare this with my previous project experience, those good experiences were also good experiences in in my previous project.

So that will help you generalise those good experiences.

And you,

you in your mind will think that in my future projects I am again going to apply these practices because in the past these were all experiences.

So generalising or drawing generalisations is a very important part of this model.

Now what may happen when you do the next project,

those good experience or those generalisations may change as we can understand that you the

good experiences might end to bad experiences and so they won't be generalisations anymore.

So we, we take that lead and then decide or make our generalisations for any future projects accordingly.

You know that? Um. Um, the concept of design patterns you have.

You might have gone through design patterns in your previous courses.

Um, so software design patterns is an example of design generalisations.

So people have gone through these experiences of solving design problems in specific ways.

And because they generated good experiences, they have generalised those experiences in the form of design patterns.

Or then there may be projects, there may be design problems where those design patterns are not that applicable.

Which can give you an indication that this generalisation doesn't work in my situation.

So all this will be part of your affection. Right.

So, um, I'll stop here and let you ask any questions that you might have.

It's a very general topic, but, um, normally we do not formalise this, this kind of, uh, thinking.

Or formalising reflection will only help.

So when you are writing a reflection, think about a model.

Maybe I'll use this model this time, and maybe I like better and conclude, uh, better things.

Any questions? Comments? Okay.

If you do not have any questions at this point, it will be good if you spend some time on working on your assignment to similar to the previous week.

I will now give you some time to get started with your assignment two right here.

And then in the second half we will be talking about the project risks.

So spend some time say 20 minutes on at least starting your assignment to, uh, anyone who has already started working on assignment two.

Okay, so give it a go. And let me know if you have any questions.

This document is available from modules at module 102.

So the best place to start would be to think about a previous project development experience number one, and then look at the rubric.

What are the elements that must be there? And then start writing the draft.

There are certain cautions that are put as examples in the description that might help you.

And I'm getting close to.

Or do you want to write? For your information, there is at the end of this document the reflect models.

You'll see that there are relevant references. Might be useful if you want to learn more.

All right. Thank you. Were you able to find something from your own history?

How many of you were able to think and at least start?

And, uh, would one of you like to share, uh, what you are intending to write?

Who has, uh, at least some experience.

Around one of the traditional software development models.

Have you developed software applications using.

Uh, for example. Um, in, in a non-formal way, using no formal model because that is what generally we do.

Did you have any course, any previous course where you were asked to use a specific software development model or developing an application?

Have you gone through a course where these of documented models were not?

Have you heard these models? In which course? For example.

Waterfall model or spiral model? No, really.

Have you so. Is this software development lifecycle?

New to you? No, it shouldn't be. Okay, so, um, even if you are, you have not got any experience, previous experience with a specific formal model.

It it doesn't matter that much for this assignment.

What matters is whether you have had at least some application development on for application development experience or not.

So if you have been a part of a software project development team,

whether a student team or an industry or maybe a freelance work, you may bring that experience into this assignment.

So it is not important that you name a specific process model that you used in your previous experience.

As long as you know that it was different from agile, and even if it was, you have already used as I previously,

maybe you can write some experiences and try to apply what you have learned in the past one week.

Any questions? Comments? Maybe error on the assignment.

Because it is due later this week. Okay, so I'll move to the next bit.

And the next bit is about the teamwork risks and mitigation strategies.

So I'm going to let me download it and then open it separately.

So in in your modules one and two under canvas module.

This document is not visible. And it lists 15 risks that.

I'm sure will be very important to learn about as you proceed with your project development in this course.

Or maybe if you are working in in some other project development experience.

Currently. If you're working with some other sort of project in some other course.

Now, what I know is, um, that you, each one of you now have a team, and each team has now been allotted a project.

So this morning, results sent out, uh, and a canvas announcement informing you about your,

uh, um, project allocation as well as Scrum Masters will be informed about more details.

So that means you are formally now going to work on, on a specific project with your, uh, with the rest of your team.

So these are the risks that you must know about.

I'll quickly go through each one of them and then we'll discuss about the mitigation as well.

The first fact. Uh, the first risk is often the uneven workload distribution.

So whenever you sit in your team, you have your team meetings.

Make sure when you come up with the list.

List of tasks. This should be equally.

Distributed as, uh, or the workload.

And that means deciding about or forcing or estimating the amount of work needed to implement each task is very important.

We have seen in the past and in other courses as well, which are project based,

that often the teams spend less time on workload distribution planning.

And then what happens is one or more members have more workload than the others.

Either they'll start complaining or sometimes if they are absent due to sickness or other reasons,

then it becomes a huge problem for the rest of the team.

So make sure the workload distribution is is good.

Also, sometimes the party members might insist on having more work load themselves because they might think they want to learn more, right?

But at the end, it leads to burnout, which you do not want in your team.

Then what communication?

I I've already indicated right from lecture one, that poor communication has been identified as the most common cause of risks.

Becoming issues. So what you want ideally is if there are risks here, do not become real issues.

So where communication can be avoided by measures like you can decide on using a tool a communication tool.

Then the lack of role clarity. So uh, or communication, um, in, in one of my other courses.

The most common problem that I've heard is that one of the team members.

So if there are, say there's a three member team and two of them are complaining that the third one is not responding at all.

So we have we have been trying to contact them for the last two weeks and they are not responding.

Now, if you apply that situation to your course and the project schedule that you have where the sprint length is just one week,

you simply cannot afford it. Not as a team, not as an individual.

Everyone has to be proactive and always end up with the rest of the team.

So that means whether you are doing your duties is a separate matter or the first thing that you must end, what is that you are in reach.

The next one is for these ones, and the next one is lack of roll clarity.

Do not start working on your bed until you have a clear understanding of what you have been allocated to work on.

If you have doubts, discuss with your team members until you have that clarity.

Sometimes, uh, say, let's say the sprint has started and by the end of the sprint.

There are two members who are claiming that V.

So I was responsible to do the same work as one of the other.

In in that last lecture when we run that aeroplane activity.

So there was one team who simply somehow ignored one of the requirements.

Now that that that reflects poor communication.

That may also reflect lack of role clarity. Maybe one of them was allocated that role and they didn't work on it.

Then conflicting schedules are very important because many of you might be working as well.

Some might prefer to work over the weekends, the others are working somewhere else during weekends.

They have other plans similarly during workdays.

So it is very important that as a part of your planning stage,

the schedules of each member of the team are absolutely clear to the other members of the teams.

It should be very transparent. Sometimes some of the members were to hide some of that information.

Please do not do that. Or sometimes members do not have clarity on their future plans.

For example, what I am going to do on on this week's Thursday um, I'm not yet certain, so I do not know how many hours I have available.

So whatever obstructions restrictions you have, make sure to put that or who your team.

There may be inconsistent skill levels. And this is also where the clarity should be there.

Who is more skilful in this area because that is going to decide the role.

Sometimes.

And, um, I think, as I mentioned in his announcement, that most of the teams have got they bid on what some teams might not have, uh, got that choice.

And especially in those cases. It might not be clear that who will take up which responsibility?

If you haven't got your own, you're the first choice for the second choice.

So we assume that if you given the five choices you actually did discuss in your teams that who is going to handle generally,

who is going to handle what skill required for a specific project that you are bidding on?

Decision making conflicts are very common, or at least that that indicates that everyone is trying to contribute.

They're discussing. They are present. They they know they're each other's schedule there.

They are available for discussions. So that that sounds positive.

But when you are on the table discussing stuff, then there may be conflicts around certain decisions, especially the software design decisions.

What should you do in those situations? You should also discuss about this in your planning.

It is very important to stay to work in a professional manner.

Never take it to the personal level, because that is perhaps one of the most important aspects of a professional life.

Then lack of commitment or motivation.

This is. This has been also very common from a practical perspective.

My experience is that in most of the student projects.

All the members are, like, more or less committed to the work.

But then there will be other cases where one or more members are genuinely.

Not motivated enough and have not committed.

Although they might be telling you that they will be doing their job right.

But internally, they do not want to complete their work and are not motivated enough.

Could be because of any reason, or it is very important to pick that up early in your project development.

And this is not a responsibility of the Scrum Master.

It is the responsibility of everyone to keep identifying the risks within the team.

If you have any, uh, issues that you picked early or example,

if you know that one of the team members is simply not contributing or they are they are not motivated enough.

The first point of action should always be talking to them, or the rest of the team members must talk to them, and then they go on from from there.

So there can be other mitigations will come to that.

Then the version control and code integration issues. There might be team members who are not used to using the version control systems.

It is very important that they spend some time early on in the project and try to acquire that skill as soon as possible,

and the other members also should be proactive in identifying if there are

members in the team who lack basic skills around version control or other tools.

Scope creep. Sometimes some of the team members may get excited enough to add extra features to the software application.

Make sure everyone is keeping a visual on on such acts because everything will be pushing.

Uh, will be. So every member of the team will be pushing the work to the common repo.

So keep a visual on what is being updated.

Then similarly others. Ineffective project planning.

And the most important one is unrealistic estimates.

So generally we should pick an estimate a deadline slightly later than what you would generally think.

That is achievable. So who gives some of who complete that work?

Lack of leadership, although in an agile and scrum that has no leader Mark, still, there should still be a sense of leadership in each member.

There will always be. That said, there will always, always be leadership element for specific tasks that have been allocated to you.

Dependency on key members. And again, a very common factor.

I've already talked about this aspect.

Uh. I'm here. An uneven workload.

Distribution. And cultural clashes.

Inadequate testing and quality assurance.

And finally for documentation. Something documented should be understood by each member of the team at equal levels in the same manner.

Uh, before, um, talking about the mitigation for these risks.

Do you have any comments or questions around the risks and have you had any such experiences previously?

I would really want to know about it. Given these 15 risks, have you actually experienced these becoming issues in in maybe your previous projects?

Any experiences that you might want to share.

Come on. If you have worked in group projects previously, you must have.

Experience at least few of them. Sometimes in the film, we've sort of left the tasting to what's the, uh, we're trying to focus on the development.

Yeah. Things like that. Then suddenly we have the rush of running the tests in a day.

Yeah. And and something fails at the last moment, and then.

Yeah, we are leaving. And from that perspective, when we as driven development is a it's a good approach.

Although that is our written first and and you know that what you want to do something that we

also experienced in last week's aeroplane activity because I gave you the acceptance criteria.

Uh, so did you, did you improve upon that in, in or.

That was the only cycle that, um, it was it was pretty much the only.

Okay. Yeah. We just didn't prioritise it in each of the, uh, sort of meetings that we had with, uh, yeah.

Some kind of sprint planning. Yeah. Uh, little bit of development that just.

We need to get it.

We were still performing user testing while developing, but not make sure that what we did written was working, but, um, writing, uh, automated tests.

Okay. Yeah. Something that that everyone must apply in your scrum cycles.

Because when you're going through these sprints.

The tests are going to be the key because the product owner is going to be critical of whether, uh, your prototypes or the, uh, um,

sprint products, as we call them, whether they are, uh, um, whether they are acceptable from the, the acceptance criteria perspective or not.

And we already know about the difference between what the product to see is and what they need.

So there can be that situation, you know, in in the aeroplane activity, for example, we were acting as the product owner.

And. In sprint two, we mentioned that one of the requirements is that you are we are going to give you a target that that will look like this.

And your planes must hit those targets. What what we said was different from slightly different from what we wanted,

because the things that you didn't know were that I was intending to show the target on the projector.

On the screen. And then that that target would be slightly higher than maybe the line of your sight.

So. Any any other experiences around these risks that you had to go through?

Maybe you had to then mitigate them. I'm in the mitigate the issue.

Not not that risks themselves. So he said at first there are risks.

As long as you have not started things, they are risks,

but then there is a potential that there will be converted into real issues and then you will have to resolve those issues.

So the risks are mitigated and the issues are resolved.

Anyone else who would like to share? Okay.

If not, then I'll be happy to move over the mitigation part.

And here's just some examples of how you can mitigate those risks during your planning phases.

For example, for uneven workload distribution, define the roles early used.

Ask tracking tools. For poor communication.

Set up a regular meeting communication tools like you have already worked with.

If you want to avoid lack of role clarity, that means if you have it documented right from the start, that will do what will help.

And if there are conflicting schedules, use Shared Calendar, which clearly shows everyone's availability during the week.

And we keep focusing on weeks because your sprint is one week, so each sprint is one week long.

Decision making conflicts. Establish voting mechanisms that will always help.

You recall when we went to the aeroplane activity, we asked you about how many story points do your A does your team estimate to complete?

That is how many aeroplane and one way that your team can do it, do that estimation is by using a voting mechanism.

So generally there's a voting mechanism where each team member will have these postcards,

these these flash cards rather containing uh, showing the numbers of points.

So the Scrum Master will gently facilitate this.

So what they'll ask for is how many story points do you think we can complete in this sprint?

So each team member can display their hash card so the display them together.

And then there is a discussion if there is a variation and so on.

They keep on discussing until and uh until they get to one specific estimate.

Then, uh, the lack of commitment or motivation will be better served with your evaluations and also celebrating milestones.

So, for example, throw a party after sprint one is successfully complete, but do not spend the whole next whole week partying.

That will spoil your next sprint. Version control and core integration issues.

Mandatory get training. Delete commands. Scope creep.

Freeze the scope early. Right.

So freezing it early would make it clear to everyone that this is the scope and must not go beyond the scope.

Maintain the change log in effect project planning and support one.

So I won't go through each one of these.

So what I expect you to do now is, number one, go through these risks and look at the possible resolutions, possible mitigation strategies.

There may be many others. Your team might come up with other ideas.

That's up to your team. Here are the severity and other aspects.

And then. Go to the modules.

The module. Module one and two section. And you see that there is.

And let me make it visible to you.

So there is a project risk quiz. I want you to take this quiz now.

It is not a canvas quiz. It has 20 questions that will help you validate what you have learned about risks and mitigation strategies.

It doesn't cover everything that is listed on that document, but [INAUDIBLE].

So please take some time to look at this. How?

So I've just, um, made the questions available on one of the predictors might help, but you can of course work.

On. Your own documents.

And of course, the questions. These questions are the answers to these questions.

Of course, slightly vary depending upon. I mean, given there could be so many other ways to mitigate risks.

But understanding and identifying them is very important.

Of course there are. There are no fault teams present here.

So when you go back and meet your team, do share these risks with your other team members.

Discuss them within your team so that there are less issues later.

So not that these questions, uh, are more of a revision to.

Remember what a specific risk would look like in your team's.

I mean, there would be a tendency to not look at a certain situation as a risk when it is actually a risk.

So this this information should help you at least identifying those situations has risks.

So let me have a look at the first one I'm thinking of or does not.

On this image a small hills. I'll. I'll just switch back here.

Right. Which? Which of the following? I'm just going through the questions quickly for you.

Which of the following best describe scope creep in a student software project?

Should we be adding features beyond the agreed product range?

So that is the scope creep, right? You are going beyond.

You are trying to implement something beyond what was decided in the project scope.

Any questions around that. And the second one, what is the recommended strategy to mitigate uneven workload distribution in a scrum team?

It is great using household use.

For example, many, many of you might prefer Trello. So do use it to track assignments and workloads.

Which risk arises when team members, all of it to maintain frequent and clear messaging.

It is where communication a team has overlapping responsibilities because no, uh, because of no clear because no clear rules are defined.

This is an example of lack of roll clarity. Which tool is most helpful in preventing version control?

You already know about that git and GitHub. Which of these can help a scrum team avoid decision making conflicts?

What do you think? Hard question six. Should be.

What should we do to avoid decision making conflicts? I, uh, did this.

Yep. We. Yep. I did discuss it earlier.

Uh, employ a voting mechanism.

What mitigation strategy addresses the risk of dependency on key members.

What do you think? The last one the.

So cross-training other team members on critical modules.

Which risk is most likely to occur if the team rushes through development and skips testing tasks?

See inadequate quality assurance. What is a common cause of cultural or personality clashes on student projects?

B. B. There should be different works, titles and communication preferences, so do identify different works files within within your team.

There may be members who want to use discord. Others want to use slack or maybe emails or other.

So do decide on one platform then.

Question ten which of the following helps mitigate ineffective project planning in a scrum with Student Project?

Yep. So, uh, so in the first one.

We're having dialysis in weekly sprint sprints with retrospectives.

Question 11 what is suitable? What is this suitable strategy or conflicting should use and scrum project.

It should be. So we want to have shared calendars and agreeing on the fixed weekly sinks.

Lack of documentation typically causes which of the following problems in a team project?

See? See? In fact, that is the only problem that is mentioned here, right?

What risk arises if the team relies on only 1 or 2 members for critical parts of the project?

So that has dependency on the key members. All right.

So I'll leave the rest to you. And, um, I hope you will.

And I think there was one last one that I because this relates to the importance of one of the events.

Or can you tell me what is the answer?

Question 20 would be which scrum event is most effective to reflect on risks like uneven workload and communication gaps?

Yes, it's always remembered that the all the discussions around how the sprint went.

That is about the process of the sprint that has just concluded will be done as a part of the sprint retrospective meeting,

whereas the sprint review will actually have the sprint demo.

So what have you created or built during that sprint will be demonstrated to the product owner, and there will be discussions around what was needed.

That is, what was the product backlog or the sprint backlog and how was it implemented?

Right. So, um, similarly, the rest of the questions are up to you.

You can look at the content that I went through and then try to, uh, answer those questions.

Also, think about the other mitigation strategies that you, you might, um, be good enough to find.

And it all depends upon your team discussions. Each member may contribute with new mitigation strategies that others may agree upon as well.

Okay. Do you know them?

Say, at least not on the faces, right?

Anyone who has seen one of these faces somewhere.

Maybe on on the cover of a book. So the first one is Ken.

Second is Jeff Martin.

And these three are one of the many around 17 inventors of Agile Manifesto, the values and principles that we went through last week.

So you can think of them as the originators of the concept of agile and how it is applicable to agile development.

You can read about them. The first two played an instrumental part and inventing scrum as well.

So the concept of agile and then scrum.

And Martin Fowler. Is.

Have you heard of, uh, Martin Fowler? What have you learned about cold spells?

Refactoring. So those concepts have come from.

They are given by Martin Fowler along with Robert Martin and others.

Do you know them? Not from offices.

If I can pronounce it correctly, I keep. Thank you.

Oh, no. Armstrong Toyota.

And he gave the concept of Kanban in 1950s or even earlier.

And so although that was not how it was defined, uh, to be applicable to the software development scheme, which was later done by David Anderson.

So he actually applied that original Kanban idea to the software development area.

All right. I want you to bring more. More pictures and more names.

But. Yeah, just just didn't get time.

But, you know, these are some of the important people that maybe you should know about.

You should try to. Or it's about their other work and research and try to understand what else they have contributed to the scene,

especially the agile software development. I'll leave you with these quotes.

Today's quotes are related to agile. And scrum with our working product at the end of sprint is of a scrum.

So always remember, by the end of the sprint you must have a working product.

If you adopt only one zile practice, let it be retrospective.

That is the importance of retrospective step.

That makes it agile makes the AI.

So if you are not doing retrospectives, you are not doing it at all.

Continuous improvement is better than delayed perfection.

Agile is an attitude, not a technique, with boundaries. The best way to get a project done faster is to start sewn up.

And another way to make it faster is. To go well.

Although Robert Martin, also known as uncle Bob.

And if you try to search this name, Robert Martin, uncle Bob, uncle Bob is he had, uh,

his Twitter handle where, uh, he keeps on posting around Israel and the relevant factors is.

You'll find a lot of. Have you read the book Clean Code?

So the clean code. So comes from Robert Martin, um, I think and and one other author.

If I so not not fully informed about this.

So clean code lists many code smells and refactoring activities.

The best way to get a project done faster is to start sooner.

And the only way to go fast is to go well. So that means it is very important if number one start early.

And then as you go along, make sure that whatever you are doing, as um,

you mentioned earlier that it decided prove or delay the testing until the end.

So do not do that. The only way to identify whether you are going well or not is by keeping on testing and verifying.

And the last one. It doesn't matter how good you are today, if you're not better next month, you are no longer agile.

I think I have to include the author here.

Right. All right. I think people, uh, not want to leave, so I'll be happy to leave as well.

So, uh, have a great rest of the week in case you have any questions, any comments, feel free to contact me via email.

Or you can also post on Ed if you want to discuss something with me.

Now. You mean. Just one more thing, because I received a question at the start of the lecture.

If you have any questions around your project allocation,

you must talk to Reza because he's actually managing the project work or the project component of the course.

But. Right. Thank you.

And, uh, I'll meet you on Friday, then. Take a look.

Yep. Uh, um, Christine worked with an investigative study.

