[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Kyoto. Welcome, everybody. Thanks for coming along. So today we're going back to systems thinking and wicked problems.

So I gave you a wee intro to systems thinking in lecture two and defined wicked problems for you.

And since then, I hope you've come to understand why you need that definition of wicked problems,

and why you might need some systems thinking tools to try and move towards a solution.

So, having done all the work on the stakeholders last lecture, and with Mark last week on the business cases and the cost benefit analysis,

you should be ready now to zoom back out and have a think about how to start formulating

these really difficult problems that can't be solved but can only be ameliorated.

So we're really ticking away at these hexagons. You've done a bit on everything now, and team building is coming soon.

But today we're back here on Systems Thinking. So what we're going to do today is a quick recap from lecture two and then build on that.

Some of you may be very interested in where systems thinking came from, others of you less so.

So I'm going to do a brief history with some books in there that are in no way compulsory for you to read, but I know some people would like to,

either during this course or afterwards, we're going to look at why wicked problems are such a focus in today's world.

And then I'll give you a quick example on how you might start to think about a wicked problem, like the rising obesity rates.

I'll talk you through early thinking on how you might frame that.

And then Amanda's going to take over and give you some more tools.

So the tools that I end with and Amanda elaborates,

will be super useful to you in your team and systems assessment when you two will be sitting with a wicked problem,

wondering how to frame it, how to formulate it. So by the end of today, you should have a wee taste of where contemporary systems thinking come from.

We talked about lots of definitions in lecture two. You should be getting a bit more sophisticated in how you think about it now,

and be able to characterise systems thinking both as a discipline in its own right,

and also as a set of tools that you can use from any discipline and across disciplines for addressing these wicked problems.

You'll be able to dive into the characteristics of wicked problems and understand why they're different from complex problems and can't be solved,

only minimised. Start to identify complex systems and then scope out part of the system which you can address,

which you can form a problem statement for to try and solve parts of the wicked problem,

to move towards a solution, and then identify and apply the right tools for your background, your thinking, and your problem.

Did anybody read the first two chapters of Thinking in Systems? No chocolate fish today.

I strongly recommend you do before you get much closer to your team project.

And I think I said in lecture two and I'll say again, if you read the whole book, you'll be at a big advantage.

If you've got a couple of people in each team that have really delved into that thinking,

you will be at a big advantage about this time in the course, people start coming up to us and saying, how can I prepare?

That's how I'd prepare. So we saw this in lecture two, just to introduce you to all the different words, catch phrases,

and adjacent disciplines that you see when you start to read about systems methodology.

And as I said in lecture two, don't get too hung up on all the words.

Just find the way that works for you and your team and systems.

Methodology came out of a whole pile of different sets of thinking, including at MIT,

where the engineers like this guy who is a towering figure in the start of the discipline as it is today,

Jay Forrester,

who noticed that the biggest impediment to making progress on lots of big issues that engineering can tackle is not actually the engineering.

So quite often the engineering problem can be solved.

But the management side, the implementation, the rollout, the values, the prioritisation,

the social problems are way harder to understand and much harder to control than the physical systems.

So it was recognised early on that engineering is part of a solution to some of these wicked problems, but can never be a complete solution.

So I've squished some really important thinking that got us where we are today into one slide.

You might be amused to read the title of this book. This comes from the late 60s early 70s.

Project on the Predicament of mankind. So that was a report from something called The Club of Rome, which was an early group of intellectuals,

including Donna meadows, who wrote that book that I've recommended you read.

When people began to realise that they needed to zoom out from their reductionist focus on specific problems and look at the whole planet.

The predicament of mankind hasn't got any better in the intervening 50 years,

and it's interesting to go back to books like that and realise just how little we listened.

So wind forward 50 years and you get books like this one.

Less Is More by Jason Haykal that was published a couple of years ago, and it pretty much says the same thing.

Um, so we keep restating the problem. We need more and more solutions, and those are just not parts of the puzzle.

They are ways of thinking about the puzzle so we can make progress.

So some thinkers that have made real contributions to how we frame all these problems include this guy Cambyses mani,

who wrote this book on multi-stakeholder decision making for complex problems.

If you're really getting into this and you've finished, um, Meadows, you could have a look at that one.

In the business world, people start to latch onto systems thinking as a way of driving organisations these slightly different language,

they come from a different perspective, but they still have the same problem.

You want your whole organisation to have the same goal, the same purpose and will work towards it.

And if different parts of the organisation are doing their own thing and have got their own goals, then that's not going to work.

We met Kate Raworth last week, Donor Economics.

So she is trying to reframe the economic system so that we take account not just of GDP and finances and the economy,

but instead look at the social limits everyone needs to be fed and housed and the planetary limits.

We can't run out of planet. So she's trying to put boundaries around the economic system so that the entire planet lives within its means.

Can't say it catching on yet, but it's a very interesting reframe of a system that's locked in with particular settings and particular incentives.

If you change the incentives towards equity and towards solving climate,

you get a very different set of incentives and goals that the planet could drive towards.

And a lot of this thinking starts to get summarised in things like this guide

from the OECD on how to use these approaches for public sector challenges,

which is kind of squarely where we are in this course this year. Now, none of these books are a guide and a go to.

Oh yeah, I'll just use that for my systems project. They'll all give you ideas.

They'll all explain the complexities. They'll give you tips on how to think and how to formulate and how to scope.

But there's no one way to solve these things. It's too hard for that.

There's another bunch of thinking that's emerged over the same time period, which is looking at complexity as a subject in and of itself.

So the Santa Fe Institute was one of the early places to address Dress complexity.

And some of you may have come across to Puna, which is New Zealand's.

Complexity. Centre of Research Excellence. It's housed here in Auckland, but it has researchers.

All around the country and actually on the advisory board of that and the heart, as it says in the logo of the.

Research centre is to really understand. Systems thinking and complexity.

And then around the edges is how to apply it in all these different situations and how to communicate that complexity to the public.

So if you're interested, feel free to dive in, but we won't assess you on any of the specifics in there.

Some people think about systems thinking as having arrived in waves, and depending on your engineering home discipline,

you will probably resonate with some of these words and not others.

The important part, I guess, is that No particular wave is correct.

It's just an evolution. We went from looking at hard systems to soft systems to critical systems, to zooming right out and being more universal.

And depending on the problems you're trying to solve, any one of those waves could actually move you forward.

But people tend now to think about pluralism.

That is, there's more than one way of seeing a problem. Both those ways could be true.

They may be incompatible. They may throw up conflicts that may teach you something about the system as a whole.

Um, heuristics are really important too. So people think about, um, critical thinking and how we use quick mental shortcuts to get to an answer.

And sometimes they're helpful, and sometimes they divert us because our assumptions were incorrect.

And as we keep building on all this thinking, different groups of people adopt it and come up with rules.

So you might see as you read this DSP rules of system thinking.

You may find them helpful. You may not show up to you. And that pulls out distinctions, systems, relationships and perspectives.

So you'll see that's different from the systems tests that we're talking about here.

If you find it useful go for it. And similarly as you go off into organisations when you start your career, you might see this acronym VMC.

So some people think that the best way to build an adaptive organisation is to have a vision.

And in this example, the vision is great by diversity and mission.

And the mission to achieve the vision might be make sure there are plenty of all those diverse organisms.

None are going extinct. None are dying out. Do you understand the relationships between them?

You're on a mission to do all those things, to achieve your vision,

and then to do all those things, you need the right culture and the right capacity.

You need people to buy into that vision and all be going in that direction on the same mission,

not pulling different parts of the organisation in different directions.

And you need an organisation that adapts and learns. So everybody makes mistakes.

Teams will make mistakes. Leadership will make mistakes. But what do you do with those mistakes?

Is it an environment where it's safe to say, you know what, we completely stuffed up and wasted the last two months?

How do we make sure that doesn't happen again? Or do we say, well, don't tell anyone, they won't notice?

So those kind of cultural things in an organisation that ability to learn are really important.

These ideas come up more and more in discussions about how to solve our world problems.

So you'll see this acronym Vuca volatile, uncertain, complex and uncertain.

When I updated this slide, I decided things were really volatile, so I added an extra one.

Um, the world is certainly getting more volatile, not less.

And so systems thinking for wicked problems is going to be something that all of you at some point will need to address.

The reason things are so volatile, uncertain, complex and uncertain.

I had to uncertain as to, um, are all the changes we're seeing in technology?

So you all know about AI? You all know how that's disrupting your studies.

You all know that it's disrupting business. There'll be lots of other technologies that come at us and come at us fast.

All of them have benefits. All of them have risks. All of them need critical thinkers to figure out how to harness them to do more good than harm.

We live in a globalised world, which is great. Makes it more efficient.

Means you can get more choice. Means that in theory, you can share wealth.

Also creates risk. Creates risk of huge global inequity.

Creates risk of lack of social cohesion. You're seeing, um, even this last week.

Mass migration into countries that can't house those people.

Because these inequities, sometimes due to climate, sometimes due to demographics, sometimes due to economies.

Um, countries just can't hold the number of visitors that are coming.

All that creates conflict. And we're seeing at the moment a really perfect example of all those things coming together.

So we have a global supply chain.

It's critically dependent on the Strait of Hormuz because of geopolitical conflict and a volatile, uncertain leadership in the Western world.

We suddenly have a war that we weren't expecting. The supply chains have been blocked intermittently and we are all struggling, therefore,

with price spikes in fuel and flow on into all the other things that fuel impacts in Western economies.

No sign of its stopping soon. High risk of more geopolitical conflict creating more change.

Technology, of course, makes conflict faster. So lots of the wars that are being fought at the moment are being fought by drones.

Um, whereas if you've got to send boots on the ground into a country, um, to invade, there's a bit of time needed.

There's a bit more skin in the game. There's much more time for diplomacy as AI takes over more and more decisions and more and more of the weaponry.

It's very quick for your AI to fight my AI, and we've blown each other up before anyone's had time to think.

These were well documented risks of drones and AI when they both emerged and the convergence was seen, but it didn't stop it happening anyway.

So there's plenty of problems in the world. So this is the definition I gave you in lecture two of a wicked problem.

The key point is that it's very complicated, but it can't be solved.

It might be long. It might be short. It's probably long.

And any solution you come up with probably won't solve it.

Might make it better,

but is likely to have tripped over so many trade offs and tensions that you've made something else worth either within your system or someone else's.

And last lecture we talked about stakeholders, and we showed you this diagram,

which applies to the whole problem or the stakeholder problem or any part of it.

You can look at the whole system and say, how complex is it? The more complex it is, the harder it gets.

You can look at the knowledge surrounding it, and the more uncertain it is, the harder it gets.

And you can look at how values diverge amongst your stakeholders. And the more they diverge, the harder it gets.

So I told you about the future of commercial fishing. Someone wanted this report.

They were welcome to grab it at the end. This was easily the most wicked problem I worked on in public policy.

But having wicked problems in public policy is in no way unusual.

And again, if you're interested. Not compulsory.

This book is great because it gives you ways to understand and respond to complex challenges in the public sphere.

And we'll use a bit of Brian Heads thinking in a minute. So here's the system definition, the simplest one that I gave you in lecture two.

You've seen some examples. Now you know that you have to find a system that satisfies the system test.

It needs elements, connections, and a purpose.

In some readings you'll see the purpose described as emergence and emergent property is where the whole is more than the sum of the parts.

A property emerges from the system that wasn't present in all the parts.

You're going to really struggle to draw a boundary around your system.

It's going to be slightly arbitrary, and as soon as you've drawn a boundary,

you're going to have tensions between the system you've defined and the surroundings that you may well influence, but you haven't put in scope.

And as soon as you've done that, you will begin to need to define your inputs into the system and your outputs out into the surroundings.

So the system will end up with interconnected related elements, so elements,

connections, inputs, outputs, and some sort of purpose goal or emergent property.

So here's Brian heads charts to try and get you to think about where your problem lies in this matrix of wickedness and complexity.

And I'm going to try and talk you through this with an example. So let's take a tame problem on this axis.

You've got how hard the problem is. And on this one you've got how difficult stakeholders and institutions are to deal with.

So a tame problem might be in this class we have 800 students.

This lecture theatre takes 600 students.

There's a university policy that there has to be a seat for everybody, and we need an overflow room and they're all booked.

It's tame because with a bit of juggling around of the timetable and Amanda's excellent relationships with the people in timetabling,

we can solve that and give you an overflow. So you all have a right to a seat.

It might get harder if the problem's still clear.

We need an overflow room, but there's no obvious solution,

so it might get more analytically complex if the maximum capacity that's available on campus at this moment is only 600.

So 200 people have to stay at home or they're looking around, that doesn't look to be too much of a challenge.

Or it might be that neither the problem nor the solution is clear. So we might have the same problem.

Too many students, um, not enough space, not actually clear whether we can solve it.

Not clear whether we can bend the policy about having a seat for everyone. Which seems a bit silly when lots of people prefer to study online.

all a bit vague, and it gets a bit cognitively complex because you can't quite work out whether we're trying to get around the policy.

Trying to find a room, trying to move the timetable just gets a bit harder.

Nevertheless, here it's not really that hard. You can solve it.

You're in the domain of a time or a complex problem. It might be that things get more difficult with the stakeholders and the institutions.

So here you might have a problem and solution that are clear, but you might have people starting to get in the way.

So we're Amanda to leave and we lose our excellent relationship with timetabling.

And we have a new member of staff that's really not very good at forming relationships with stakeholders, in this case timetabling.

And they have a big fight. They might just not talk to us because they'd rather prioritise somebody across campus.

That's nicer. So we've got a clear problem, a clear solution and some real awkward interpersonal in the middle.

This might get more complicated. As we say, we're not quite sure whether we need the overflow.

We need a separate timetable. And, um, again, up here, all these problems with the complex, not clear problem,

not clear solution get harder when you introduce conflicts and personalities.

Because not only are you not clear what you're trying to do, nobody really wants to work with the other person to solve it.

And so you get into muddy areas here, and then let's say we have a politically complex problem.

There's lots of talk nationally at the moment about the role of universities,

whether we're all too old fashioned, whether we're sticking to really old models of teaching.

So it could be that the new minister of Education, after the election in November says universities take up too much space.

They don't need those big rooms. Nobody comes to lectures anymore. You can't have policies that says that every student has to have a seat.

Country can't afford it. So now you've introduced some politics into what was fairly simple problem.

That would be easy enough to do. I'm sure we could come up with some solution.

Some people prefer to go online, some sort of ballot system if there's a fight, but you've got politics that have been included.

Let's take it up a notch and say, all right, we have to make all these decisions before the government is formed.

The government hasn't formed yet. One side wants to get rid of the right to a seat for every student.

The other side is absolutely campaigning to go back to old fashioned teaching methods.

And you all need to have a seat, and we don't know which way it's going to go.

Now we need two plans and it's getting really tricky. Still solvable.

But let's suppose that the government actually says sicker universities.

We don't need them. We're not funding them anymore. Everybody needs to go off and learn with AI.

You really outdated institutions. We're going to hone it right down and go back to a very elitist system.

We don't need everybody to do critical thinking. We're going to outsource that to AI, and we're all going to work for AI.

Um, I think the university would struggle to respond to that, and I don't think there would be a solution, so I'd call that a wicked problem.

I don't think I'd call it very wicked, but there doesn't seem to be an option on brain scheme for wicked and very wicked, so we'll call them the same.

So we're in this corner. Complex issues, grumpy stakeholders, conflicting requirements, no obvious solutions.

And in engine 303, you are down here and we're drifting right up here.

So you've been on a journey where you could do these quite easily.

And now we are going to make your head hurt by making them impossible to solve.

So there's different ways that you can start to conceptualise a really nasty problem.

And one of these, and one that I quite like is called the iceberg model.

So the iceberg model points out that what you see in the world It's often just the tip of the iceberg and there's a lot more going on underneath.

So a silly, simple example. We perceive the world at the iceberg level.

You might wake up one morning, I might wake up one morning. Let's make this about me, not you, and find out I've caught a cold.

I could just ignore that. Or I could think, why have I got another cold?

I seem to often get a cold. I seem to often get a cold after I have pulled an all nighter, because I didn't write my lectures in time,

and then been so relieved to have got through the day that I went to the pub and drank too much.

And then three days later, I'm sick. So maybe there's a pattern of behaviour that is causing this, but why would I do that?

So what's causing that pattern? Or maybe it's something about me.

Maybe I need more time management. Maybe my job description is overwhelming.

Whatever it is, there's probably some structures in place.

My habits which are going to come up down here.

The way my workplace gives me the tasks could be anything, but there are things to think about that might be creating the patterns.

Likelihood is in the silly example that it's me, right? It's my mental model.

It's me leaving things till the last minute. It's my expectations and my values that just don't bother to change the pattern.

There are other ways of thinking about it, and this one's called Levels of Thinking.

This one has included more layers and you can, if you like, start to label the layers of a problem to look at specific things.

So in this case there's a layer for technology, a layer for governance, a layer for business and market, and a layer for patterns of behaviour.

So this is a little bit abstract. So I thought what we'd do is just look quickly at a wicked problem which is obesity.

So obesity is a massive problem in New Zealand. We are the third most obese country in the world.

And the trend line is not good over time. So this is data from the Ministry of Health.

This is how the British have started to think about it as a systems problem.

In England, we have high levels of overweight and obesity across the life course.

Being above a healthy weight increases the risk of many serious health conditions,

which places a huge strain on our health and social care services and our wider economy.

What we eat and how active we are is influenced by the environment we live, work and play in.

It is this range of interconnected factors that together can cause obesity.

That's why there is no simple solution to tackling obesity and promoting a healthier weight.

It is everyone's business and everyone has a role to play.

Elected members and senior council leaders need to support and champion a whole systems approach.

This means bringing together stakeholders from across the local authority and wider community to all play their part.

Developing a shared understanding of factors that drive obesity locally encourages ownership and

helps prioritise actions to achieve and sustain a healthier weight and address inequalities.

It is important for these actions to span the short, medium and long term.

Quick wins may build support. Longer term actions can deliver sustainable change for the better.

By working together, we can better consider how actions impact others within the wider system and ensure we are joined up on tackling obesity.

Taking a whole system's approach is likely to require a change in mindset and new ways of working.

There are benefits for all when our environment promotes good health.

These could include improved productivity and employability of local populations,

and a reduced demand for public services such as health and social care.

Public Health England has published a guide to help local authorities get started.

Search public Health England. Whole systems approach to obesity guide.

So that's the sort of situation you might be faced with in your assignment.

And you will be going. Where do we even start?

What is it actually that's at the tip of the iceberg. So what would you guys say?

Was it the tip of the iceberg? What's the event?

What's going on? Anyone?

Did someone say people are getting fat? I mean, that's basically the problem, right?

There's an obesity epidemic. You could frame it in a different way.

Anyone want to put anything bigger, bolder or smaller?

More manageable at the top of the iceberg? No one's chatting today.

So I put obesity rising. So I'm using the two models in parallel just to show you there's no right answer.

So imagine you're all in your team. You're brainstorming and people say, well the problem is obesity is rising.

And someone might say, actually that's not the problem. The problem is poor health outcomes.

And that's totally valid. You could put poor health outcomes at the top of the iceberg if you wanted.

What are the patterns that are leading to that?

Well, there was a whole jigsaw puzzle of things, but two of the key ones were poor nutrition and limited activity.

Now, at this stage, you're going to be going. Hmm. Which one's more important?

Now, these are problem statements. Have we missed anything? Um.

I've gone here with poor nutrition as the thing I'm going to try and solve with my problem statement.

I absolutely understand that limited activity is another part of the problem.

I don't think I can manage to put both of those in my problem statement. So I'm going to go with poor nutrition.

So I've essentially gone, hmm, let's not worry about that for now.

It might be that you need two problem statements and the other ones on limited activity.

You'll just have to sort it out in your team when you've got your problem.

So following the example in the video of zooming in on the food environment, one of the problems in New Zealand is food deserts.

And you are not one is. It's basically a place where there's hardly any fresh food.

So if you look around any student digs, you will find a large amount of stores that sell very processed food,

cheap food, packet food, pot noodles, stuff that you can keep in the cupboard.

You don't need a fridge. Stuff that lasts forever. Um, but not much fresh food, meat, all those things.

And that's part of the food environment.

And people focus on these because it's not necessarily that people have no self-control that stops them staying a healthy weight.

It's more about the environment they live in. It's more at the community level. But you could, if you wanted to take it a different way.

You could talk about individual incentives, education,

and then I'm sure you would debate in your group which one was more important and which was the stuff you should focus on in your problem statements.

So the mental model I've gone for is market forces dictate the food supply, which is how you get the food deserts.

You could go very many different ways, but that's the key piece that I've pulled out.

And I've used an iceberg model. This model I resonate with less to the extent that when I first did this, I did it upside down.

Just tell you that story to show it doesn't really matter how you do this thinking.

These are just tricks to start conversations and help organise your thoughts.

But there's lots of ways of doing it. Then I think about this one as drawn as it's got more layers.

So you haven't necessarily pulled out a problem statement, but you can say obesity is rising.

Maybe that's because of food deserts, maybe that's because market forces dictate food supply.

Maybe that's because heavily processed foods are cheap and abundant.

So that's what's driving these market forces. And fresh food is sell to export prices and unaffordable locally.

So here you've got different problems all feeding into this market forces piece, which is creating food deserts,

which is creating an environment where it's easy for people to eat too many calories that are not nutritious.

So they stay hungry and they keep eating and obesity rises.

This would be where you got to after an hour or so. So on the first morning and you would be going, oh, we're just we've missed this.

We've done this. What else can we do? But it's a way of starting to take this massive problem and dumping things on a page.

And Amanda is going to take you through some more sophisticated thinking that you might get to you by the afternoon.

So we just went over the iceberg model and the level of thinking. Those are two of our tools that we use.

There's other ones that you're already familiar with. You can go and you can look at trend maps.

So we're looking at what's happening over time. Are we seeing repetitive behaviour repetitive fluctuation fluctuations.

We also can look at system models. So all of you are fourth year engineers. So you should be familiar with most of these.

We can have some basic block flow diagrams. If you're a chemical engineer A process flow diagram.

If your you have computational diagrams of our systems. So those we're used to.

Let's talk about some of the tools that maybe we haven't seen or really played around with too much.

So before we get started with the tools, we really want to understand what our system is doing.

So we like to ask what's happening or what's happened in the past.

We want to look and see recurring events. Do we see any patterns?

We're very good at seeing patterns. But is the length of time actually long enough to see the pattern?

We're looking for structures and interactions. We're looking for underlying beliefs, and most importantly, we're looking for feedback.

So our systems are we experiencing positive feedback or experiencing negative feedback within each system you're dealing with,

you're ultimately going to see both. And then as we mentioned earlier, it's really hard to define that boundary.

How do you draw that boundary around your system. So you know what system you're talking about.

What other perspectives, methodologies, disciplines can help you to find the system.

And then one of the most important things, when we want to look at a system and looking at tools,

it's where in the system could we make small shifts or make small intervening points that would make big differences?

And then how can we identify those? And once we identify those, what are the trade offs that we may have to handle?

Is there a potential for unintended consequences? What happens if we say, all right, we want to eliminate New Zealand's methane production,

whereas most of New Zealand's methane produced our methane emission.

What was that? Dairy cows. So let's just say Canterbury can't have any cows anymore.

What's going to happen to that economy? What's going to happen to those people?

So what are those unintended consequences and what's the potential for them?

And then how do we handle them? So those are all things we want to think about in our model.

So two tools for really doing this are leverage points and causal loops.

And causal loops are essentially a more advanced form of a feedback loop.

So Meadows, one thing she's most famous for is what we're called leverage points.

So everybody here knows what levers and the lever arm rule or where you apply pivots.

So if we think this is our system, we want to look and see where can we intervene on the system.

And these are listed in orders going from 12 at the top and one at the bottom.

So 12 is going to be the closest to the system, but it will have the least amount of impact on our system.

So we're looking at physical events. What types of things or parameters can we change that will impact the system.

So let's say we want to promote EV cars?

What's the way to best way to do that? Or one of the key ways to do that?

Well, maybe it's having a subsidy. If we, the New Zealand government, offers a subsidy of, let's say, 5000 or maybe $10,000 for every EV car you buy.

Well, that will have some impact. That will drive up how many people buy EVs, or if a company wants to have that impact on their, um, employees.

They could offer a subsidy that will have some impact on the amount of the type of cars those employees have.

So there's going to be some impact, but it's going to be small.

Then we can start to look at our system, and we look a little bit further away.

And we start to look for patterns of behaviour. How is information flowing?

What may be cycles and feedback is within that system.

And then how can we change that. Maybe it's. Hmm.

Okay. It's been really cold recently. Or at least called for Auckland standards.

Has anybody seen their electricity bill go up? What happens if you knew exactly how much energy or the cost of how much energy you had in real time?

So let's say, oh, I turn my heater up and now I see that my energy bill is skyrocketing.

Is that going to make you change your behaviour because you know something earlier?

So we think about when we know information and how we can impact those positive and negative feedback loops.

Then we can have fun with the system. Is it possible to change the social system, change the rules of the systems,

add incentives, punishments constraints, change laws, change rules and regulations?

What about allowing the system to self-organize itself?

If we change one thing, or just changing the goal of the system,

and then the best way to impact the system to intervene in the system is to create a paradigm shift.

Okay. Change that mental model. So New Zealand, we are a car oriented society.

If we wanted to say in a generation become a non car inter um non car oriented society.

So no cars. How would we do that. To do it within a generation we can't be iterative.

It can't be incremental by just adding more bike lanes. How in the world do we shift the model to say cars are bad.

Don't use them. Now we can have other things.

So we mentioned education earlier. Has anybody followed along what's happening with NCAAs and the school systems?

Some of you may have. I have because I have young kids in the school system, and they're going through changes of how they're presenting information,

how they're testing what's happening here at the university.

We're already adapting what we are going to expect from students as this system rolls out.

And when we think about, okay, the government's making this change.

Where in the system does it fall? Well, that's up to the government to ultimately decide which lever they pulled and where.

They think it falls somewhere, probably in this region. So trying to identify your system, what levers you can pull is very key.

And when we think about where we intervene, most of these interventions take place close to the system.

We're looking at those physical events all the way up to how that information flows.

They tend to be easier to design around. We can understand them.

We can see the impact that those interventions would have.

But if we really want to change the system, we need to move further out.

And those are much harder to do. So this is the struggle with this struggle with impacting system.

But one of the key skills of systems thinking is understanding when and where you can pull levers.

Can you identify something out here that maybe you don't quite know how to do yet, but something you need to think about more.

Now. Everybody here should hopefully recognise a feedback loop.

So A feeds the b, b feeds the c, c feeds back to A, and we're all should be used to doing brainstorming and mind mapping.

So a causal loop is looking at positive and negative feedback.

So here we have molecule z. The more z there is we're increasing.

We're having a positive impact on x. And the more x we have is negatively impacting how much z production.

This is what we call a balancing loop or a negative feedback loop. This is a goal oriented system.

This keeps our system in check. Our body temperature and what controls our body temperature is regulated by one of these systems.

However, we can also have positive feedback loops or reinforce feedback systems or runaway systems where Z positively impacts Y,

which then positively impacts Z. These are reinforcing. We're always increasing, and our systems are going to have a balance of B and R.

Now we can take a look at what a causal loop looks like.

So the first one I want to show you here we're looking at ultimately student outcomes as they're leaving secondary school and they're breaking down.

How's the school climate. We're looking at the school discipline and academic failure.

So here we're centring around disruptions to the learning environment. How does that impact student focus.

How does student focus impact engaged learning and how does that impact acting out.

And this is essentially a reinforcing loop.

School discipline is a balancing loop When students are sent to the principal, those students tend to be suspended,

which decrease the disruptions of the learning environments for the other students.

However, for those students who are suspended, they are spending more time at the classroom.

They're falling behind more in academics, which makes it harder for them to focus.

So here we're seeing a reinforcing loop on why these students are doing poorly.

So within our system we can have multiple loops. And the key is trying to find which loop we can have the most impact on.

And here. Does anybody know what this one is. Have we seen it before?

Can we figure it out? It's looking at the impacts and the mapping of how Covid impacted society.

So here we have our policy interventions. We're looking at what happened in the financial system and the economic system.

We've got the environment. We have how individuals wellbeing was impacted.

And we also have society. So what's going on. So you can do these types of causal loops for most systems.

And tomorrow will actually walk you through a couple of examples of how students have done this in the past.

Now, why systems actually work is systems are going to be very robust, where I should say robust systems.

They work pretty well. It's really hard to dismiss the disrupt our system.

They're going to be resilient.

They're built on top of balancing and reinforcing loops, and they self-organize themselves to make sure that they're not fragile.

They don't break down easily. These are long, normally long lasting systems.

If we think about a system and we want to figure out where do we intervene in this system,

what we really want to do is we want to use these tools to first get an idea of a system, and then begin to map that system out.

And you don't need a great huge detailed diagram.

You can start literally on a whiteboard mapping out the system. Look at what things do we know, what are we measuring, what things could we push on.

And then really we're trying to find those loops. What loops are amplifying our system or balancing it out?

What loops are dominating our system? Once we find something that dominates our system, that's the point of impact.

Now, can we actually come up with an intervention that will allow us to have an impact on the system?

Does that fall in one of those physical or informational sections of our lever points, or is it further out?

So in summary, remember a system is made up of elements, relationships and purpose.

You are going to be dealing with complex, very wicked systems within this course.

And systems thinking is not an algorithm or a single process. It's using multiple tools to understand what's happening.

It's a broader understanding.

It's critical thinking and proposing of interventions and solutions that may change the system because our system is complex.

We are going to have stakeholders whose value are divergent, and we're going to have knowledge that we don't quite know what it is yet.

We don't know how we make a change and what's going to come.

Now. With that, any questions?

All right. Have a good rest of your day and see you next lecture. This guy didn't come.

