[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Have you booked a ticket yet? I haven't, I have to. This time, I love Seoul, so definitely should.

Me and my partner will come. I want you guys to start.

We've just got a really packed lecture, so that's good. Yeah, yeah. Hey, guys, listen up.

We've got interview here. Going to chat about their production this year. Um.

Hi everyone. My name is Stella. I'm the assistant producer for this year's engineering review.

My name is Tara. I'm the assistant plot director for engineering review. Um, and the tickets for our show this year are on sale now.

Um, the show dates are the 27th or 29th of August, so that's Thursday through Saturday of week six.

So if you don't already know, engineering reviews, the student led production.

We have a plot based on Star Wars. We've got comedy skits, videos, vocals, a live band and dancers.

And you probably know somebody already who's in it because there's a lot of partners this year.

So get your tickets, show up for your friends, support the arts.

Yeah. Um, you can scan the QR codes to get the link to the tickets, and we hope to see you there.

Thank you. Thank you.

Thanks. All right.

How's my sound? Out the back. All good. Thumbs up. Yep.

Can you hear me? Not too loud. Anyone?

Hello? Yes. All right. We'll take that. Why don't I take your seats, guys, we're kicking off.

Thanks. All righty.

We got a packed lecture content today, so we're going to jump right in.

Social cost benefit analysis. So how do we within these business cases which we covered on Tuesday.

How do we go about quantifying and monetise monetising some of the impacts that

the interventions or the options or solutions that you create and implement.

And we're having another technical difficulty today. All right.

We're going keyboard. So learning outcomes we're going to talk about social cost benefit analysis and how the supports evidence based decision making.

So we talked about how we make these business cases to inform the decision makers so they can make the right decisions.

Okay. So how do we collate that evidence. How do we compare options.

How do we compare evidence of these systems level projects. And so we'll talk about applying the social cost benefit analysis.

We'll start off with a quick recap of the cost benefit cost benefit analysis concept.

We covered an area in 303. How do we think about non-monetary monetary impacts.

How do we compare those and what are some of the limitations of this cost benefit analysis.

So we'll do a quick recap. And then we'll jump right into the social cost benefit analysis.

What I've done is for this canvas page have a look at some of the previous industry business cases.

And we've also uploaded two of last year's Systems Week business cases that you guys can take a look at.

They've got a whole bunch of information in those appendices on how they do some of these calculations.

And so really when we're thinking about building this toolkit, we're jumping into the financial case here.

And so there will be paramount or really important for your systems week projects.

And so again what we're going to look at that financial case.

You'll have to analyse two, at least two of your shortlisted packages to then determine what that preferred way forward is going to look like.

So where we looked at the solution space, we're now looking at that financial case.

And so a quick recap of some concepts, hard and fast.

We covered discounted cash flow analysis which uses the time value of money.

Can anyone tell me what the time value of money is? Does anyone remember?

That's okay because we'll come to it in a second. And these cost benefit analysis focus on a project or a singular product or project or service.

Mainly looking at the impacts being revenue versus costs.

So what's the revenue that you're bringing in for the value that you're delivering to that customer.

And how much does it cost? In systems level projects we use a social cost benefit analysis.

So because we're implementing projects or options in society that have a large,

wide ranging array of impacts on different facets of what we call well-being, or you can think of these as domains for sort of quality of life.

And we'll have a look at those today as well as in tomorrow's lecture.

But these projects generate social and economic benefits and they cost money to produce.

A quick recap of costs. So if we look at those program business cases that we talked about on Tuesday's lecture,

obviously right at the start, when you're first making these business cases, they're very high level.

The actual costs that will end up being in the detailed case is going to be further away at this stage.

So where you guys are sitting is right around somewhere in between the the indicative and the detailed business case.

Obviously, as you move towards full implementation, the actual cost of the project is going to be pretty close to what that case is.

Obviously not 100% of the time, but you guys are sort of sitting around here.

So we're looking at high level categories, categorised costs.

And so when we looked at line by line costs in chain 303, what we're looking at engine 4 or 3 is more high level broad categories of costs.

So let's say you want to build a factory to do some sort of, um, project.

For example, let's say you want to build a river catchment for plastics to stop all the plastics flowing down the river.

You're going to have some capital costs.

Maybe you need to buy a bit of land around where you're implementing that, or you might need to have some machine costs, right.

So we're thinking high level costs here. And so some um, costing tools that you might come across or can use, these are mainly around transport cases,

but they can give you a good idea of the sort of level or orders of magnitude that we're looking for.

For these types of costs really important, you must round to some level of significant figures,

usually two at maximum three, right, but not down to the dollar, not even down to the closest 1000 $10,000.

Usually we're dealing a millions, hundreds of millions, even billions.

Okay. So if you come up to me and you're like, oh, um,

machine is or our implementation is going to cost 100,250,785, I'm going to be like, how do you know that?

Because if we look back at this, right,

the costs at this level are going to be pretty far away from what those actual costs are going to end up being.

So making sure you're rounding to account for that uncertainty. So you can use some of these tools here.

A lot of the time these won't help you very much.

Or they may not help you with your specific systems case. In that case, you may need to go make some broad assumptions.

Validate those assumptions by looking at research, looking at similar projects, looking at reports or other primary resources.

Okay. So there's a little bit of research that you may have to do um, during systems week.

And so this is an example from one of the Rethinking Plastics Systems Week reports.

This was around the container return scheme.

So the idea that you can get plastic and you can return them to certain collection points and those can be returned.

How much do those cost. And so you'll see you have to make some assumptions around those costs backed by evidence.

How many machines, how many buildings, how many plants.

Right. Where are they going to go? What's the geography like? Where are you going to put them?

How many? Right. And so yes, these ones here are down to the dollar.

But when you're reporting them, this is just a working step. When you're reporting those make sure to run those to two significant figures.

Okay. So you can have a look at that in your own time. And again have a look at those previous systems cases and their appendices.

And they have a bunch of detailed calculations that you can go through in your own time.

But these are the types of sort of high level cost calculations we're looking at.

And so recapping the time value of money from ancient 303.

The time value of money states that money is worth more in the present than the same amount is worth in the future,

because we can invest it in the interim. Right? We can take that money.

We can put that money to good use. We can generate value over time.

Right. So that same amount would be worth more in the future. And that's important for our discount rates.

Right. And we'll talk about discount rates in a second.

But just covering those economic metrics that we covered in engine 303 net present value.

So we're looking at those discounted benefits minus the discounted costs.

Discounting those to the period. And then summing all those gives us our total NPV.

And so when you're coming up with a package or a package of options, the total NPV for that entire package would be made up of a bunch of smaller

NPV totals for each of those options or solutions that you're implementing.

Then the benefit cost ratio. So taking the present value of those benefits over the present value of those costs and the internal rate of return,

what is the rate of return that makes that zero.

Okay. So that's a quick recap. We should all be familiar with these by now.

And NPV greater than zero is desirable.

We would accept similarly with the benefit cost ratio greater than one or an internal rate of return greater than zero,

showing that we are generating some value. And remember we can't use these in isolation.

We need to use them together in order to create a picture of what the economic outlook for these projects are.

Okay, so that was a quick recap into social cost benefit analysis.

Once you have completed your options assessment, you've assessed them against DFV, CSS Critical Success factors.

You have your final shortlist or a series of shortlist packages.

You need to assess them using social cost benefit analysis.

And so these are the steps that we'll be going through today for the social cost benefit analysis.

First we need to define the counterfactual okay.

So what's our baseline for comparison of our options. Then we need to identify who's going to lose who's going to gain.

So who are those key stakeholders. Then identify the cost and benefits and identify our time period for this analysis.

Value and monetise those costs and benefits. Discount those to the cost to the common period or to the present.

We need to determine is the CBA worth determining or do we need or do we need to carry out more research?

And then we need to summarise the facts and write the final report.

And so you can have a look at that link that takes you to the guide on Treasury's website.

But we're going to walk through that today. And so the counterfactual what's our baseline.

What's our baseline for analysis. And so you can read through this in your own time.

All this is saying is that it matters what your baseline is.

So if our baseline would be say having nothing.

So down here against the no bridge, no ferry counterfactual, the bridge would be worth it.

But if we compare it against having a ferry terminal, for example, then the bridge may not stack up.

So all this is trying to say is that it matters what we define as that baseline case of what we call that do nothing case.

What does do nothing mean? Does it mean we're going to roll back the investments that have already been made?

Does it mean we're going to do nothing more and we're just going to keep the status quo?

Okay. So defining what that baseline is is really important.

And so if we look at the plastics project from last year.

They needed to define this, and it was really important that they define what that counterfactual was.

What does that do? Nothing. For some teams, it meant that they were going to keep the status quo.

So all of these funds and implementations that are currently being carried out by the government would be kept in play.

For some teams, that meant taking away all of the current investment and literally doing nothing or even doing less.

And that really matters towards how you compare the solutions or the options that you're coming up with.

So just a little excerpt there.

But they currently had they had their do nothing outlined as keeping the current day conditions or keeping that status quo,

keeping what was already happening. So really important.

Make sure you have a good idea of what that do nothing case is.

And so for the Rethinking Plastics report the do nothing was really, really bad, right?

They do. Nothing is thousands of tons. Keep going to landfill. You keep producing all those greenhouse gases.

We keep paying for more and more landfill. All the plastic and all of the pollution still going into the rivers.

Okay. So the really significant negative are what we call dis benefits by doing nothing.

So much so that for some teams they do.

Nothing was so bad that their options that they eventually generated didn't actually get them all the way to positive.

Right. So you're just really you're implementing solutions to create the least negative outcomes.

And so let's have a quick look a little bit further. So step two identify who gains who loses.

This is a stakeholder analysis identifying who those stakeholders are I don't want to spend too much time here.

You'll have a look at stakeholders next week. Then we need to start identifying and valuing the benefits and costs to society.

And they can be monetary or non-monetary. So benefits can be measured and money terms financial.

They can also be measured in non-monetary terms. So they could be quantifiable potentially reducing customer complaints or more qualitative.

And so what we're going to do tomorrow is look at some of those more qualitative measures and how we compare those.

But first off we have to identify the benefits and the costs. So what are those impacts on people.

Things like reduced congestion things like having clean beaches.

If you're thinking about plastics reducing harm to wildlife.

Again, if you're thinking about plastics, then we need to quantify those benefits and costs using various tools.

And then finally, if we can monetise those costs and benefits against criteria that have been established in the literature.

And so what I want to talk about next is something that's really important when you're thinking about these impacts.

And so really these solutions or options can generate four types of outcomes.

You can have benefits. So societal benefits right.

So creating something creating some sort of positive outcome for society.

It could also include generating some sort of revenue.

So if you think about City Rail Link which we're going to hear more about throughout the course,

they actually generate what they call firebox revenue. So they generate revenue by charging you guys to use their services.

Right. So that's a benefit does benefits and negative outcomes for society.

So let's say you implement a tax on plastics.

Write that tax is going to increase costs all throughout the supply chain.

And that's going to have negative impacts or dis benefits.

Maybe a company just can't bear that cost of the new tax. And so they go out of business.

People lose their jobs. Right. Those are real impacts that could come about through the implementation of some of these options.

And then we have costs. So these things take or cost money to implement.

The government has to spend money to make these things happen. This potential for cost savings as well.

So again looking at plastics, if we implement some solution that reduces the amount of plastics go into landfill,

then that's going to reduce our costs of having to deal with those landfills or dealing with that waste.

So there's a cost saving there as well. And so benefits and cost savings, cost savings are a benefit, right.

Because we're reducing the amount that the government needs to spend on these things.

So benefits and cost savings go hand in hand. Similarly Costs.

The cost of implementation is considered a risk benefit.

It's considered the the government's going to have to take money from somewhere to spend on your thing.

What does that mean? It could mean less money for education, less money for hospitals.

Less money for the new bridge that we need. Okay, so these kind of go hand in hand.

So you need to be thinking about these four facets or these four outcomes when we're coming to try and monetise or identify these costs and benefits.

Okay. So into monetisation of social impacts. So this is a little little story.

This is a story about the Royal Oak roundabout.

And I just wanted to highlight that the impacts of projects that you may work on can in fact be as high as this.

So 2018 report said removing car parks was sorry.

Recommended removing car parks leading into the roundabout, but wasn't implemented.

And what happened was that resulted in a death or a fatality when a cyclist was thrown in front of a car.

And so the point being is that you make decisions as engineers around these projects,

you implement projects you're part of projects that have real impacts on people.

Now, obviously this is a really extreme case, but for some of you, this might be what you have to deal with.

So you have to weigh things like safety, like how much you value a human life versus things like convenience.

It's more convenient to have the car parks there. What about the impacts of the businesses?

If you remove those car parks, right, less foot traffic, or when you are putting in a new roadway,

or you're putting a new construction like on K Road or City Rail Link,

all of those businesses that were affected by all of the roadworks that couldn't have people coming through to their companies.

So you can have a quick read. You can have some further reading. Have a look at that article.

But the point is, is that your projects, your decisions have impacts on people.

And so we actually have what we call the statistical value of a human life.

Does anyone want to try and guess how much that is? What do you think the value of a human life is?

Well, it's like $5 million. So looking at the at the PDF.

Yes, 12.5 million NZD. So that's the value of statistical life in New Zealand.

So when you're weighing up these projects, it allows you to weigh up the impacts on mortality, the impacts on risk of mortality.

Okay. So the point is that it's not the actual value of any one of yours lives.

Any one of you's lives, one of you's lives. But it's really about being able to have some sort of data or criteria to measure things like convenience,

like time saved against things like risk to people's lives.

And so just a bit of history going back through used to be, oh, basically these are statistical human life.

And any of these, um,

monetary impact measures are based usually on surveys of people based on surveys of people and what we call the willingness to pay,

willingness to pay. And so back in the day, 98 or 91 was 2 million.

Then it went up to 4 million. Before Covid, it was around 5 million.

And then the most recent study was at 8000 person survey in 2023, which judged that 12.5 million NZD.

And so, again, you need to weigh these things against convenience, against time savings,

against emissions, to try and make sense of this and what you need to do.

And again, these are done based on surveys. They survey people.

How much are you willing to pay to have like one minute less sitting in traffic?

Something like that. Some people other things are like measuring happiness.

The the congestion measure is a measure of how happy people feel sitting in traffic.

How happy do you feel sitting in traffic? How much would you be willing to pay to not sit in traffic?

And so that brings us to this point around willingness to pay. This is a bunch of surveys that get done.

They have various measures, and they're really based on some of the UK's work on wellbeing and this thing we call wellbeing or quality of life.

And so you can have a look at those links in your own time for some further reading.

But that's what all of this stuff is based on. So what we're going to look at is this tool called the Cost Benefit Analysis Spreadsheet.

And that is a database of all of these types of data.

So things like how much an ambulance visit would be, things like other health concerns um, homelessness potentially.

And they're updating it all the time. Okay.

So that's a little prefix to social impact. Valuing things that matter, things like convenience and time versus things like environment animals.

These are one of the measures that I love in the databases around how much people are willing to pay to save an endangered species.

How much would you all pay to save an endangered species? Okay, so this comes straight from Treasury's guide on cost benefit analysis.

But we're going to do a divergent thinking first right.

We're going to identify all of the possible impacts that a particular innovation sorry a particular option could have.

Then some of those we're going to be able to quantify a subsection of those.

We're going to be able to quantify where possible. And then a subsection of those, we're going to be able to monetise and put into monetary terms,

and to compare those in our social cost benefit analysis. So how many of those do we monetise?

Well that's up to you guys. Usually it's somewhere around the sort of 2 to 5 mark.

It varies depending on the project, but you're going to have a priority of some of the biggest impacts,

and they're going to be relevant to whatever your option is. Okay.

So it's up to you. It's up to the context of that project.

And so we need to identify those impacts to do with society environment health education quality of life.

And so this is what we call the living standards framework. It's sort of a little soft introduction to it.

We're going to go further in detail onto on this tomorrow. But as you can see, things to do with our collective well-being, things like health,

knowledge, cultural capability, work, housing, income, environmental amenities.

So things to do with the environment, leisure, friends, family, safety and other more subjective well-being.

So we need to be thinking about what do our options really affect?

What do they have a play on? So if you're thinking back again, going to plastics.

If we think about plastics. What happens when we reduce plastics?

There's less of them going into landfill. So there's less volatile emissions coming off the landfill.

There's potentially impacts on wildlife, marine wildlife in particular.

Right. Plastics go in the rivers. Then they flow into the oceans, kills turtles, kills fish, kills dolphins.

Okay. And we care about those, right? How much do you care about them?

So these are the things we're weighing up. And so that brings us to our first tool that we can look at which is the CBA's spreadsheet.

So this is a tool on Treasury's website. And it looks it contains a database.

You can actually do the entire cost benefit analysis. But for the purposes of engineering 403,

we're mainly going to look at the database that they have on some of these quantified and monetised social impacts.

And so it allows a consistent approach to this cost benefit analysis, cost benefit analysis because it has common assumptions.

And there are those sorry, the research behind some of these figures have common assumptions.

It's a long term view of those costs and benefits, allows you to discount where possible.

And this transparency around the evidence base. And that's a key one.

So we want to talk about in a second is that the actual figures don't really matter.

What matters are the assumptions that underpin all of those figures.

And so by understanding what those assumptions are, you can understand what your effect is going to be with your options.

And so when we use the spreadsheet and can have a look at it here, we want to look at that impacts database.

We want to try and monetise the impacts that are relevant as best you can.

There are other tools as well that we'll look at. So there's some transport benefits in this manual that you may look at.

There's some emissions data as well that you can look at. Otherwise you will need to do your own research.

Have a look at some papers. Primary resources to figure out how to monetise some of these.

You can have a look at the full work example on page 24 in the guide.

And so this is what it looks like. These are some of the impacts that they have.

And so the cost of the health system from a fatal crash not the value of a human life, but the cost to the system $17,000.

Similarly serious crash, $20,000. Isn't that interesting that a fatal crash and a serious crash.

The serious crash is higher. Interesting. And so there's a whole bunch of these impacts that are listed on this database.

You can have a look at those in various wellbeing domains health education all across the board.

Some of those will be helpful for your systems project. Some of those may not be so last year.

And the Rethinking Plastics, there were some environmental impacts that were really useful,

but there were some other impacts that teams had to go out and do a little bit

of their own research to figure out how to kind of monetise these impacts.

And so they do nothing but do nothing. Is the baseline right.

So our counterfactual. So we need to understand what that do.

Nothing looks like. So we've defined it previously as either do nothing more or do less.

Whatever it might be keep the status quo. Then we need to start to try and monetise what the do.

Nothing actually is. If they do, nothing is -$100 billion.

We probably want to do something about it. That's an extreme case.

But in this example you can see one effect that they quantified and monetised was reduced wellbeing.

Again, several assumptions um reflecting reducing of 0.05 points in life satisfaction is applied per person,

and then they look at the impacts database to try and monetise that based on all these assumptions and then show us you're working here.

So this is a perfect example of what we want to see in your appendices in your Systems Week projects.

So the do nothing approach demonstrates a 0.05. reduction in well-being from plastic pollution valued at $5,200 per ton.

Uh, sorry per one point charge change per person results in an estimated annual loss of 1.4 billion.

When applied to our population of just over 5 million over a ten year period, this equates to an NPV of -12 billion.

So that's just one. That's just one well-being domain. Just one.

Remember, we were probably looking at 2 or 3, even four major impacts that we want to quantify.

So it doesn't really make sense to only quantify or to bother quantifying a facet of the problem that's only going to be,

say, -1,000,000 when the other pieces of the pie are in the billions.

So you're going to have a priority of the largest sort of two, three,

four impacts there that are going to make up for the bulk of the impacts for your do nothing option.

And so this one was damage to marine life as a cost or a benefit.

Remember costs benefit similar. Current estimates show New Zealand spends approximately 380,000 tons of plastic.

Based on global estimates, 0.5% of New Zealand's plastic waste ends up on the ocean.

The cost of plastic waste per tonne has been quantified as USD 3000 to 33,000.

The annual cost was assumed to be 15,000 somewhere in the middle and then using some calculations,

the cost to marine life is approximately 50 million. Okay.

So again this team quantified and monetised several more under the do nothing.

And that formulated their baseline to then compare their options against.

So looking at do medium as their package to implement benefit gains or wellbeing gains from reduced littering littering.

And based on that figure approximately they can save 16 million per year, right?

They had several others.

But if they're only weighing up to, you know, 16 million, 15 million, probably less than 100 million, but their do nothing case was -12 billion.

So really sometimes in these cases, the best option is simply the least worst Option.

You're not always going to create a positive benefit if the problem is so horrendously big.

Okay. Good. We're very quiet today.

So there's some limitations to the CBA. Not all impacts will be relevant to your projects, and not all impacts are listed in the databases.

So the first step when you're doing your social CBA probably towards Wednesday of Systems week.

Have a look at that impacts database first and then move to other sources if there's absolutely nothing there.

But remember do that brainstorm first, brainstorm and ideate all of the potential impacts that the do nothing and your options will have.

Data sets can be incomplete. Um, sometimes the evidence that base that is used may not be the best.

So we had one report that everyone jumped on last year, and what they found is they started to look at it as that,

um, some of these assumptions aren't really don't really make sense in our context.

All right. So maybe New Zealand's geography is just as different.

Maybe our people act differently, maybe some educational resource wouldn't be as an effective option here.

Right. So always remember to bring it back to the New Zealand context. So understand those assumptions not the number itself.

Now just quickly step five would be discounting the benefits and costs to today's value using a discount rate.

And understand because these projects are large and extend over large periods of time,

that time value of money or that discount rate is really important.

Okay. It's really important. And we'll talk about a little bit about that towards the end of the lecture when we come to limitations.

And so I don't want to spend too much time here either. But understand that there is some stuff that goes into calculating the discount rates,

compared to 303, where we looked at the cost of debt or the cost of equity.

How to service that. We need to make sure that our projects were delivering more value than they cost.

Similarly, we need to deliver more value to society than what they cost.

For your projects, you'll be using 8%. And then we need to assess the CBA.

Cost benefit analysis and business cases are really expensive. They're really expensive.

And so the size of the project matters and it determines when we need a project or not.

So the people who carry these out policy advises and decision makers.

But the cost of doing the CBA cannot exceed the potential value of the project.

So it doesn't make sense to do a CBA for a societal project that's only going to cost one 5 million.

That's pennies compared to what it might cost to collate all of this data.

And then step seven write the report. So then we want to write up the report.

So we use summary costs summary tables for those costs those benefits.

Have a look at the guide. It points out some good stuff to use there.

In practice we would use confidence intervals right. Not point estimates.

But again that requires a lot of research a lot of studies.

And so point estimates are fine in systems week.

But recognising you would really carry out a proper sensitivity analysis, changing those assumptions and bringing in confidence intervals as well.

If you have an option that may not perform, it's really hard to monetise those impacts.

But there's a whole bunch of qualitative impacts that are positive.

Bring those out. Those intangible benefits are important. They commonly come up in housing projects, right?

It's hard to see those impacts. But if you house people, they don't spend money.

They spend less time in the hospital. They have less burden on society.

They have less than welfare. Right. So some of these are monetizable.

Some of them are a little bit harder, but you should still bring them forward in the business case.

And so it should provide some of the intent or intuition behind those results.

And of course always listing your sources and assumptions. And so a few things here.

The time frame of the analysis is important. But remember back to 303.

It favours early benefits and later costs because over time they're discounted further.

So if our benefits occur really late in the game, it takes 50 years to generate those benefits.

That project's going to look far worse off than a project that would then an option that would generate benefits in those first ten years.

So what's that appropriate timeframe? We're going to give you the time frame in this course.

Short term decision making can bias long term outcomes. So governments think in election cycles right.

Whereas many of the challenges today are intergenerational. They require longer term thinking.

And just a little point to indigenous worldviews usually operate on that intergenerational timeline.

So we'll look at a couple of those tomorrow. Again, we already cover this.

Costs and benefits can be difficult to measure and monetise. Do those financial values really reflect societal values?

And other decisions driven by value politics, or are they just masquerading as a financial case?

So the assumptions, the discount rates, those valuation methods all influence that preferred option.

But political priorities shape the ultimate decision that's made. All around a bit quick today.

That's okay. So a couple cases to finish up the day.

And so when we're talking about time frames and we're talking about these problems existing over large time frames,

the time value of money and the timeline of your option implementation becomes really important for flooding.

These flooding effects are happening now.

So what good is it to have something, an option that's going to make people safe in 20 years time when they're losing their houses tomorrow?

Right. So thinking about our timelines of our different options,

some options you're going to be able to implement in the really short term straight away tomorrow,

maybe some bigger infrastructure projects like big transport projects.

They're going to take many years to come and start generating benefits.

Five years. Ten years. City Rail Link was a nine year construction or eight year construction with a business case that was made in 2015.

So some of these options that might look good may not actually solve the problem.

For people that are experiencing these impacts now or those benefits now.

So Parliament had a playground just pointing to something that's a little bit harder to monetise.

A cost benefit analysis for a playground outside of Parliament. I actually don't think it's there anymore.

Right. It's been it's back, it's back. That's good.

So the costs are easy to measure, but how do we measure those benefits?

They're all non-financial. They're all intangible. Culture to Parliament, attracting more talent.

Being a place that. People that come from overseas and they see a beautiful playground with people playing outside the front on our government lawn.

Right. How do we measure some of these? Sometimes you just can't. And so the business case needs to reflect that certainty or uncertainty.

And again what time frame do you measure that on. It's built pretty quick.

And those benefits are going to come for years maybe even decades.

So again thinking about those time frames. What about our interisland ferries or our not interisland ferries?

What value would you place on a nationally integrated rail system?

There's a whole myriad of transport benefits by being able to have ferries with rail capability.

That's what we're trying to get to. The reason that these got cancelled decided that they were too expensive.

The works on either side of the channel were too expensive.

But what's the value of the lost productivity when you cancel those ships?

If we were supposed to get ships in 2028. But we're not getting them till 2030. How do we measure that sort of productivity loss?

Did they did they think about that? Did they not? Who's to say I'm not in cabinet.

And how do you weigh resilience of seismic events climate change, Covid.

Right. One of the limitations we talked about with business cases is the idea that they're a snapshot or a cross-section in time.

Other things are going to happen. So again, what time frame do you measure this on.

And what is your counterfactual. What's your do. Nothing. If we don't have an enabled rail system between two islands.

Then we should try to measure or monetise the benefit of granting that transport.

So some key takeaways. So you need to identify, select and rank those impacts by the order of significance.

So you're going to have a whole bunch of impacts that create the most impact.

And then monetise those using comparable cases studies or other reports.

Some won't be monetizable. And we'll look at what we do with those tomorrow.

We compare those using what we call living standards framework or the four capitals model.

And we do that qualitatively. But the important thing is that those are communicated in the report.

It's not all just about monetisation, but it's about Communicating what all the intangible impacts or positive benefits are as well.

And we compare those. And again looking at that tomorrow comparing non-monetary impacts.

Quantitative versus qualitative and discussing those in the report.

All right we ended a bit early today. So thank you very much. We'll see you tomorrow for qualitative analysis of social impacts.

Thank you. Any questions come down.

We'll have a chat. 45.

